Title: Reconciling In-Context and In-Weight Learning via Dual Representation Space Encoding

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.13459v1

Published Time: Tue, 17 Mar 2026 00:34:01 GMT

Number of Pages: 28

Markdown Content:
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026) 

# Reconciling In-Context and In-Weight Learning via Dual Representation Space Encoding 

Guanyu Chen chen-gy23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn Department of Automation, Tsinghua University 

Ruichen Wang wang-rc24@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn Department of Automation, Tsinghua University 

Tianren Zhang † trzhang@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn Department of Automation, Tsinghua University 

Feng Chen † chenfeng@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn Department of Automation, Tsinghua University 

Reviewed on OpenReview: https: // openreview. net/ forum? id= bJK7VIOWAU 

# Abstract 

In-context learning (ICL) is a valuable capability exhibited by Transformers pretrained on diverse sequence tasks. However, previous studies have observed that ICL often conflicts with the model’s inherent in-weight learning (IWL) ability. By examining the representation space learned by a toy model in synthetic experiments, we identify the shared encoding space for context and samples in Transformers as a potential source of this conflict. To address this, we modify the model architecture to separately encode the context and samples into two distinct spaces: a task representation space and a sample representation space . We model these two spaces under a simple yet principled framework, assuming a linear representational structure and treating them as a pair of dual spaces. Both theoretical analysis and empirical results demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed architecture, CoQE, in the single-value answer setting. It not only enhances ICL performance through improved representation learning, but also successfully reconciles ICL and IWL capabilities across synthetic few-shot classification and a newly designed pseudo-arithmetic task. The code is available at: 

https://github.com/McGuinnessChen/dual-representation-space-encoding .

# 1 Introduction 

In recent years, large-scale models based on the Transformer architecture have demonstrated remarkable capabilities across language (Brown et al., 2020; Guo et al., 2025), vision (Achiam et al., 2023; Maaz et al., 2024), and robotics (Driess et al., 2023; Zitkovich et al., 2023). Among these capabilities, the in-context learning (ICL) ability has drawn increasing attention, as it offers a general paradigm for task generalization. ICL refers to the capability of a pretrained Transformer model to solve previously unseen tasks by using demonstration examples in the prompt—without updating its parameters. In contrast, in-weight learning (IWL) characterizes the conventional ability of a model to recall the memory stored in weights. An ideal model would seamlessly integrate both capabilities: relying on memory to handle training tasks, while adapting to new tasks through contextual cues. However, recent studies suggest that there exists an inherent conflict between ICL and IWL (Park et al., 2025; Nguyen & Reddy, 2025). This leads to a notable performance degradation when the demonstration examples deviate from the training distribution (Chan et al., 2025), thereby limiting the generalization ability 

> †Co-corresponding authors.

1

> arXiv:2603.13459v1 [cs.LG] 13 Mar 2026

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026) of ICL. This conflict is closely related to training settings such as data distribution (Chan et al., 2022), model size (Shi et al., 2024), and training time (Singh et al., 2025). Singh et al. (2023) hypothesize that it arises from the competition between the two capabilities for the shared model circuits. Nguyen & Reddy (2025) on the other hand, attributes this to the different relative learning rates of ICL and IWL. Furthermore, some studies (Chan et al., 2022; Singh et al., 2023; Anand et al., 2025) have attempted to alleviate the tension between ICL and IWL, but can only achieve a tradeoff under particular Zipfian data distributions. Hence, it remains a valuable question to understand and eliminate the conflict between ICL and IWL. In this work, we aim to understand why models tend to oscillate between ICL and IWL capabilities under different settings from the perspective of representation learning. We observe that in models with strong IWL performance, the learned representation space provides a sufficiently rich representation of the query samples themselves. In contrast, models with strong ICL performance learn representation spaces that effectively encode contextual information. However, these two desirable structures of representation are difficult to acquire simultaneously, making it challenging to achieve strong ICL and IWL performance at the same time (see Figure 1 bottom). Motivated by this observation, we hypothesize that the ICL-IWL conflict can be alleviated by encoding the context and query samples into separate spaces, thereby preventing interference between the two types of information. We refer to these spaces as the task representation space and the 

sample representation space , respectively. To provide a principled modeling of these two spaces, we build upon the widely accepted linear representation hypothesis (Mikolov et al., 2013; Nanda et al., 2023; Park et al., 2024) and propose to model the task representation space as the dual space of the sample representation space. We prove the completeness of a sample representation space under sufficient training tasks, which could facilitate task generalization by ICL. We also formalize the entangled nature of Transformers’ encoding process – standard softmax attention does not support such a dual-space structure, highlighting a contrast with linear attention mechanisms commonly adopted in recent theoretical analysis. Furthermore, we propose a straightforward architectural design, CoQE, as an algorithmic exploration. Unlike standard Transformers, CoQE employs separate pathways to encode context and query samples, aiming to learn the task and sample representation space, respectively. The final model output is obtained by computing the inner product between elements from the two spaces according to the Riesz representation theorem. Our synthetic experimental results show that CoQE not only achieves lower ICL error in both in-distribution and out-of-distribution scenarios, but also reconciles ICL and IWL across synthetic few-shot classification task of Chan et al. (2022); Singh et al. (2023; 2025) and our newly designed pseudo-arithmetic task. 

# 2 Related Work 

Investigations on ICL Mechanisms. From the theoretical perspective, existing works have examined how Transformers perform ICL across various scenarios (Zhang et al., 2024a; Li et al., 2023; Tian et al., 2023; Nichani et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024; Huang & Ge, 2024; Oko et al., 2024; Liang et al., 2025). These studies typically analyze simplified architectures such as linear self-attention or query-key-combined formulations, and many of them conduct analyses from the perspective of Bayesian model averaging (Zhang et al., 2025b; Ye et al., 2024). From the empirical perspective, Garg et al. (2022) firstly demonstrated that Transformer-based ICL can generalize effectively to out-of-distribution (OOD) tasks, leading to a surge of interest in exploring its generalization behavior (Ahuja & Lopez-Paz, 2023; Kossen et al., 2024; Pan et al., 2023; Fan et al., 2024; Xiong et al., 2025; Yadlowsky et al., 2023; Bu et al., 2025). Some work has shown that LLM can implicitly encode task vectors during ICL (Hendel et al., 2023; Todd et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2025; Han et al., 2025). Unlike these works that focus only on task information encoded in the model’s representation space, we examine the relationship between task information and the intrinsic information of the samples. From this perspective, we seek to explain the conflict between ICL and IWL. 

Relationship between ICL and IWL. Beyond investigations on the ICL mechanisms, some studies have found that ICL is not a guaranteed and stable capability of Transformers; rather, it competes with the model’s inherent in-weight learning (IWL) ability, which relies on information stored in the weights (Chan et al., 2022; Singh et al., 2023; Reddy, 2024; Panwar et al., 2024). Chan et al. (2022) examined the impact of different training data distributions on both abilities, finding that only when the training data follows a certain Zipfian distribution can both abilities coexist. Singh et al. (2023) further confirmed the transient 2Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026) nature of ICL, observing that it always fades after emerging and gives way to IWL. Nguyen & Reddy (2025) attributes this to the different relative learning rates of ICL and IWL, and conducted an analysis on a simplified one-layer transformer model. Chan et al. (2025) proposed a simple theoretical model, which is a linear combination of an in-weight learner and an in-context learner. Singh et al. (2025) empirically discovered a more complex coopetition relationship between ICL and IWL. However, to date, no work has truly achieved coexistence between ICL and IWL across varied training conditions. 

Linearization in Latent Space. Beyond task-specific vectors, a line of work has examined how models internally encode a variety of abstract concepts as linear vectors in latent space, giving rise to the commonly accepted linear representation hypothesis (Mikolov et al., 2013; Nanda et al., 2023; Park et al., 2024). Several studies have shown that concepts such as truthfulness (Marks & Tegmark, 2024), time and space (Gurnee & Tegmark, 2024), and other semantic properties (Dalvi et al., 2022; Merullo et al., 2024; Ye et al., 2025) can emerge in the model’s latent space, using linear probes as the primary tool. Additionally, larger models tend to yield more disentangled and interpretable internal representations (Bricken et al., 2023; Cunningham et al., 2023), and this can be regarded as evidence of a world model within large models (Zhang et al., 2025a). In this work, to provide a principled treatment of the encoding spaces of context and query samples, we introduce the notion of a linear task representation space, grounded in the linear representation hypothesis. 

# 3 Preliminaries 

In-context learning setup. The basic setup for analyzing ICL was first introduced by Garg et al. (2022) and has since been widely adopted (Yadlowsky et al., 2023; Pan et al., 2023). Consider a distribution DX

over an input space X ⊆ Rdx , and let F denote a class of functions over a distribution DF . For each prompt, we first sample a task f ∼ D F , then draw a set of n input-output pairs {(xi, yi)}ni=1 , where xi

> i.i.d.

∼ DX and yi = f (xi). These sample pairs serve as context demonstrations. Then, we independently generate a query input xq ∼ D X . The final prompt is gathered as a sequence: 

P = (x1, y1, . . . , xn, yn, xq

).

The ICL capability of a pretrained model Mθ refers to its accuracy to produce predictions ˆyq = Mθ (P) for yq = f (xq ), without having explicit knowledge of the current task f and without updating its parameters. Chan et al. (2022) extend this setting by introducing few-shot image classification tasks. In this setup, x

represents an encoded image, and F, as a set of classifiers, maps X to a finite label set Y. The ICL capability refers to the model’s ability to correctly classify a query image xq based on the demonstrations. 

Transformer model. A standard single-head self-attention (SA) layer (Vaswani et al., 2017) operates on an input matrix Z ∈ Rde×L, where L is the sequence length and de the embedding dimension. Let Q = WQZ,

K = WK Z, V = WV Z with WQ, W K ∈ Rdk ×de and WV ∈ Rdv ×de . The attention output is 

SA( Z) = Z + WO V · softmax 

( K⊤Q

√dk

)

,

where WO ∈ Rde×dv and the softmax is applied column-wise. For the theoretical analysis of ICL, the prompt P is typically re-organized into an embedding matrix: 

Z =

(x1 . . . xn xq

y1 . . . yn 0

)

∈ R(dx+1) ×(n+1) ,

where dx is the input feature dimension. Moreover, they often use a linear self-attention (LSA) variant obtained by removing the softmax and merging parameters: 

LSA( Z) = Z + 1

n WOV ZZ ⊤WKQ Z, 

where WOV = WO WV , W KQ = W ⊤ 

> K

WQ ∈ R(dx+1) ×(dx+1) are trainable, and 1/n is a scaling constant. The model prediction ˆyq for the query is taken as the bottom-right entry of LSA( Z).3Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026) labeled as 0 in context labeled as 1 in context no support in context 

# ①

# ②

# ③

# ① ② ③

Figure 1: (Top left) Overview of our synthetic task setup. (Top right) ICL and IWL performances under different training settings ( E, L, Pbursty , α). The Transformers fluctuate between ICL and IWL capabilities, whereas our CoQE models robustly reconcile the two capabilities. (Bottom) Representation visualization of ten classes on distinct context conditions. We observe that good clusters for samples and good clusters for contexts are hard to achieve simultaneously. Detailed discussions are presented in Section 4. 

Dual space. Before formally introducing our dual-space modeling framework, we first present the general mathematical definition of the dual space. 

Definition 3.1 (Dual space) . Let V be a finite-dimensional inner product space over a field F (typically R

or C) with inner product ⟨· , ·⟩ . The dual space of V , denoted V ∗, is the set of all linear functionals from V

to F:

V ∗ ≜ {f : V → F | f is linear }. (1) For every f ∈ V ∗, there exists a unique vector ω ∈ V , called the Riesz representation of f , such that 

f (v) = ⟨ω, v ⟩, ∀v ∈ V . Let {e1, . . . , e n} be the basis of V . The dual basis {e1, . . . , e n} ⊂ V ∗ is defined by 

ei(ej ) = δij , 1 ≤ i, j ≤ n, where δij is the Kronecker delta. In the following, we will show that this dual-space formulation can be used to model the relationship between a task representation space and the model’s sample representation space. Moreover, by the Riesz representation theorem, elements from the two spaces can be composed via inner product. 

# 4 Representation Space Analysis 

In this section, we train and evaluate Transformers on synthetic datasets (Figure 1 top left) under a range of training conditions. By examining the learned representation spaces, we investigate how models with good ICL performance differ from those that excel in IWL. 4Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026) 

Figure 2: (Left) For three training settings and four training checkpoints (3k, 10k, 50k, 100k steps), there are clear positive correlations between ICL performance and CSC, and between IWL performance and SSC. (Right) Through various experiments, we observe that larger E improves IWL but causes ICL to disappear, and larger L consistently enhances ICL while slightly harming IWL. Different colors and line styles represent different training settings. Detailed results are provided in Table 3. 

4.1 Synthetic Task Setup 

We use a synthetic few-shot classification task based on the Omniglot dataset (Lake et al., 2015). The dataset contains 1, 623 character classes, each with 20 samples. We construct prompt sequences that each consists of eight image-label pairs followed by a query image (Chan et al., 2022; Singh et al., 2023; 2025). We use a ResNet to encode images input, and the training objective minimizes the cross-entropy loss between the model’s prediction and the correct label for the query image. Training sequences have two key properties that affect the tradeoff between ICL and IWL: burstiness and Zipfian exponent. In bursty sequences, three out of the eight image-label pairs in the context share the same class as the query sample. This setup allows the model to infer the correct label based on context alone, which has been found to incentivize ICL while suppressing IWL (Chan et al., 2022). To avoid repetition biases, bursty sequences additionally include three image-label pairs from a distinct distractor class. Pbursty 

denotes the proportion of bursty sequences in the training set, while the rest are generated via random sampling. The second factor is the Zipfian exponent, which controls the frequency distribution of different classes. Under the Zipfian distribution, the class probability is defined as p(R = r) ∝ 1/r α, where R is the rank of the class, and α is the Zipfian exponent. When α = 0 , the distribution becomes uniform. Chan et al. (2022) observe that when α = 1 , a sweet spot emerges, where the model reaches a tradeoff for both ICL and IWL. During training, we keep image-label mappings fixed. Test sequences are divided into two kinds, corresponding respectively to the evaluation of ICL and IWL capability. For ICL, we use sequences with four images from each of two classes, and we set the class labels to either 0 or 1 randomly for each sequence. Accuracy on this evaluator is measured across 0 and 1 as possible outputs, and chance-level accuracy is 50% . As these labels are not associated with these images during training, the only way to achieve above-chance accuracy is to refer back to the context. For IWL, we use sequences where none of the context images come from the same class as the query, but all of the image-label mappings are the same as during training. In this case, ICL is not useful, as there are no matching images in context, so the model must rely on mappings stored in weights. 

4.2 Observations and Analysis 

During training, we consider four factors: the ResNet embedding dimension E, the number of Transformer layers L, the bursty proportion Pbursty , and the Zipfian exponent α. The training outcomes under different 5Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026) combinations of these factors are shown in the red region of Figure 1 top right. We also collect and visualize the query sample representations of three models on the boundary of the red region, corresponding to the configurations (64 , 12 , 0.9, 2) , (64 , 12 , 0.9, 0) , and (64 , 12 , 0.9, 1) . Specifically, we examine the token embed-dings of xq under three different context conditions: (1) when four images of the same class as xq appear in the context and are labeled as 0, (2) when they are labeled as 1, and (3) when no image of the same class appears in the context. For the choice of token embedding layer, we empirically find that different layers yield consistent qualitative results; therefore, we directly use the final layer embeddings. We focus on the ten most common query classes, and the UMAP visualizations are shown in the Figure 1 bottom. 

Observation 1: ICL corresponds to good representations for context, while IWL corresponds to good representations for samples. The two are difficult to achieve simultaneously. As shown in Figure 1 bottom, the first model forms well-clustered representations of query samples from different categories (points with different colors), but fails to capture the label distinctions provided in the context demonstrations (the squares and circles of the same color overlap). This indicates that the learned repre-sentation space sufficiently encodes intrinsic information of samples but lacks a clear encoding of the task information contained in the demonstrations. Consequently, the model achieves high IWL accuracy but ex-hibits almost no ICL capability. In contrast, the second model shows the opposite behavior: it fails to form distinct clusters for samples from different categories but demonstrates sensitivity to contextual information (the squares and circles of the same color are shifted apart). So the model has little IWL ability but possesses some ICL capability. The third model achieves a tradeoff between the sample information and contextual information in its representation space, thereby realizing a tradeoff between ICL and IWL performance as well. However, the training conditions are rather restrictive, and both abilities remain suboptimal. To further support our observation, we employ two quantitative metrics derived from the standard silhouette coefficient, which evaluates cluster cohesion and separation. The silhouette score s(x) measures how similar a sample x is to its own cluster compared to other clusters. Using Euclidean distance d(·, ·), we define a(x)

as the average distance between x and all other points in its own cluster Cx, and b(x) as the average distance to the nearest neighboring cluster Ck (where k̸ = x). 

a(x) = 1

|Cx| − 1

∑ 

> x′∈Cx,x ′̸=x

d(x, x ′), b(x) = min  

> Ck̸=Cx

(

1

|Ck|

∑

> x′∈Ck

d(x, x ′)

)

(2) The silhouette score is then given by: 

s(x) = b(x) − a(x)max {a(x), b (x)} (3) The first metric we employ is context silhouette coefficient (CSC). It measure whether the model learns "good representations for context". For a fixed object class c ∈ { 1, . . . , N } (with N = 10 ), we treat the samples as two distinct clusters based on their contextual labels (0 or 1). Here, a(z) measures the distance to samples with the same context label, while b(z) measures the distance to the opposite context label. We average the scores within each class c and then across all N classes: CSC = 1

N

> N

∑

> c=1

1

|Zc|

∑

> z∈Zc

s(z). (4) The second metric is sample silhouette coefficient (SSC). SSC adapts the metric to measure "good represen-tations for samples" without context support. In this setting, the clusters are defined by the N ground-truth object classes. For a sample i with class yi, a(i) is the intra-class distance, and b(i) is the distance to the closest distinct class. The final metric is the average across all M samples of all classes: SSC = 1

M

> M

∑

> i=1

s(i). (5) In Figure 2 left, we report how ICL performance correlates with CSC, and how IWL performance correlates with SSC. Both show a clear positive correlation, providing quantitative evidence for our observation that the structure of the learned representation space is tightly linked to the model’s ICL and IWL behavior. 6Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026) 

Observation 2: Model size also affects the ICL-IWL tradeoff. We make another new finding that model size also strongly affects the ICL-IWL tradeoff in standard Transformers (Figure 2 right). We observe that, under the same conditions, a 12 -layer Transformer exhibits stronger ICL but weaker IWL compared to a 4-layer Transformer. We suppose that this is due to the Transformer’s inductive bias toward attending to context, compared to just memorizing context-irrelevant sample information. We also observe that increasing the ResNet embedding dimension from 64 to 512 nearly eliminates the model’s ICL ability while substantially enhancing IWL. Notably, we connect a fully connected layer after the ResNet to reduce the dimension back to 64 before inputting to the Transformer, ensuring that the latter’s role remains unchanged. We speculate that the larger ResNet increases the expressivity of individual sample tokens, and when a single token is sufficiently expressive to solve the task, the model tends to ignore the context. This is consistent with Observation 1 that sample information and contextual information are difficult to coexist during training. 

# 5 Dual-Space Modeling of Task and Sample Repressentations 

We have shown that the conflict between ICL and IWL originates from the difficulty of simultaneously en-coding sample information and contextual information within the same representation space of Transformers. We aim to reconcile ICL and IWL by encoding the context and the query samples into separate represen-tation spaces, thereby addressing their incompatibility within a single space. This raises a new question: how can we provide a principled modeling of these two spaces such that they can interact in a coherent and meaningful way? To this end, we start from the simple yet powerful assumption of a linear representational structure and propose our dual-space modeling framework. All proofs are provided in the Appendix A. 

5.1 Task Representation Space 

We begin with the widely acknowledged linear representation hypothesis (Mikolov et al., 2013; Nanda et al., 2023; Park et al., 2024), which is the idea that models internally encode abstract semantics of samples as linear vectors in latent space. And because tasks are inherently semantic, this hypothesis can be formalized from a measurement perspective according to Park et al. (2024). 

Definition 5.1 (Linear sample representation space) . Let X ⊆ Rdx denote the input space and Y the label set. A linear sample representation space M ⊆ Rd is a finite-dimensional inner product space equipped with a mapping ϕ : X → M , such that 1. (Learnability) ϕ is parameterized by a model M and can be learned from data; 2. (Linear Measurement) In the case of regression with Y ⊆ R, there exists a linear transformation ω

such that, given any (x, y) pair, the label can be expressed as 

y = ⟨ω, ϕ (x)⟩. (6) 

In the case of classification with Y = {0, 1}, the label probability is given by 

logit P(y = 1 | x) = ⟨ω, ϕ (x)⟩. (7) Definition 5.1 formalizes the notion of a sample representation space under the linear representation hypoth-esis in the single-task setting. It can be straightforwardly extend to the multi-task case, assuming that there exists a shared linear sample representation space across different ICL tasks . Note that this assumption has been implicitly embedded in a wide range of theoretical and algorithmic work (Garg et al., 2022; Hu et al., 2023; Kim & Suzuki, 2024; Zhang et al., 2024b). Based on this assumption, we define the corresponding linear task transformation space. Without loss of generality, we consider only the regression case. 

Definition 5.2 (Linear task transformation space) . Let F = {f : X → R} denote a task function space defined over the input space X . We assume that there exists a sample representation space MF ⊆ Rd, together with a mapping ϕF , such that MF is linear with respect to X and each label set Yf = {f (x) | x ∈ X } , ∀f ∈ F .A linear task transformation space is then defined as a linear functional space T = {t : MF → R}, equipped with a mapping ψ : F → T such that for any f ∈ F , ψ(f ) = t satisfying 

f (x) = t(ϕF (x)) , ∀x ∈ X . (8) 7Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026) Building upon this foundation, our key theoretical contribution is that we find the task transformation space can be modeled as the dual space of the sample representation space. See Appendix A.1 for the proof. 

Proposition 5.3 (Task-sample duality) . Let X be the input space and Yf the multiple label sets corre-sponding to each task f ∈ F . Under Definition 5.2, there exists a linear sample representation space MF

and a linear task transformation space T , where T is the dual space of MF , i.e. T = M∗F .

Definition 5.4 (Task representation space) . Under Proposition 5.3, for each task f ∈ F , ψ(f ) ∈ T admits a unique Riesz representation ωf . The task representation space WF is defined as the set of all such Riesz representations. Then for any f ∈ F , we have 

f (x) = ⟨ωf , ϕ F (x)⟩, ∀x ∈ X . (9) In summary, we map various nonlinear ICL tasks to vectors in the task representation space, leveraging the linear representation hypothesis, the dual-space formulation, and the Riesz representation theorem. From the above formulation, we can further define basis representations and basis transformations. 

Definition 5.5 (Basis task representations) . Under Proposition 5.3, let {m1, . . . , m d} be a basis of the sample representation space MF , and let {t1, . . . , t d} be the corresponding dual basis of the task transformation space T . The basis task representations are defined as the Riesz representations of {t1, . . . , t d}, denoted by 

{ω1, . . . , ω d}, which satisfy 

⟨ωi, m j ⟩ = δij , 1 ≤ i, j ≤ d. (10) Thus, every sample representation ϕF (x) can decompose uniquely as ϕF (x) = ∑di=1 αi(x)mi, and every task representation ωf can decompose uniquely as ωf = ∑dj=1 βj ωj . The output can be given by 

⟨ωf , ϕ F (x)⟩ =

> d

∑

> i=1

αi(x)βi.

Our next Theorem 5.6 shows that, under the dual-space modeling framework, a sufficient set of ICL tasks guarantees a basis-covering sample representation space. See Appendix A.2 for the proof. 

Theorem 5.6 (Completeness of basis representations under task traversal) . Under Proposition 5.3, we assume that a learner with sample representation mapping ϕθ is presented with a task traversal curriculum C

such that: span {t | t ∈ C } = T . Then, if the learner achieves zero empirical error, the learned representation mapping ϕθ satisfies: span {ϕθ (x) | x ∈ X } = MF .

It can be expected that, by promoting a basis-covering sample representation space, our dual-space modeling framework could enhance ICL capability. We empirically validate this in Section 7.1. 

5.2 ICL Formulation under Dual-Space Modeling 

In this section, we formulize ICL under our dual-space modeling framework. 

Definition 5.7 (Context-induced task representation in ICL) . In the ICL setting, the task representation can be specified jointly by two components: (1) context demonstration of labeled examples z1: n = ( z1, . . . , zn)

with zi = ( xi, yi) ∈ X × Y , and (2) a representation mapping ϕ : X → Rd. That is 

ωf ≜ ωf (z1: n, ϕ ). (11) Definition 5.7 formalizes that in the ICL setting, the task specified by a prompt is determined by its context portion. Thus, the encoding space of context naturally serves as the task representation space. We further show that existing theoretical analyses of ICL based on LSA (Zhang et al., 2024a; Kim & Suzuki, 2024; Wu et al., 2024) are fully compatible with our framework, from which we can derive a closed form of ωf .

Proposition 5.8 (Closed form of ωf under simplified LSA) . Consider an LSA layer applied after a feature encoder ϕ : X → Rd implemented by an MLP. Suppose the LSA projection matrices WKQ and WOA are initialized such that 

WOV =

( ∗ ∗

0⊤ 

> d

1

)

, WKQ =

( Θ 0d

0⊤ 

> d

∗

)

.

8Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026) Sample Encoder   

> (token -wise)
> Task Encoder
> (contextual)
> context query
> task representation
> space inner
> product
> output

dual 

> sample representation
> space

(b) CoQE  

> Feed -forward
> (token -wise)
> context query
> Multi -head Attention
> (contextual)
> N

×

> output

(a) Transformer 

> Embedding

Figure 3: Comparison of Transformer and CoQE architectures. Unlike the Transformer, which encodes both context-level and sample-level information into the same representation space, CoQE implements dual representation spaces encoding that explicitly distinguishes between context and samples. 

Then the final prediction takes the form ˆy = ⟨ωf (z1: n, ϕ ), ϕ (xq )⟩, where 

ωf (z1: n, ϕ ) = 1

n

> n

∑

> i=1

yiΘ⊤ϕ(xi). (12) Proposition 5.8 can explain the effectiveness of LSA simplification in analyzing ICL: it implicitly performs our dual-space modeling between the task representation space and the sample representation space. However, we argue that it fails to capture the entanglement of standard Transformers encoding progress , which use the original, unsimplified SA. As we will show in the next theorem, SA cannot realize such dual-space modeling. 

Theorem 5.9 (Entangled structure under general SA) . For a standard SA model with softmax-based atten-tion weights, there does NOT exist a pair of ϕ0 and ω0(z1: n, ϕ 0), such that the model prediction admits the following decomposition: 

ˆyq = ⟨ω0(z1: n, ϕ 0), ϕ 0(xq )⟩. (13) From our dual-space modeling perspective, Theorem 5.9 formalizes the entangled nature of how Trans-formers encode context and sample-level information. See Appendix A.4 for the proof. We posit that this entanglement is the underlying reason for the observed conflict between ICL and IWL. 

# 6 CoQE: A Transformer with Separate Context-Query Encoding 

We have established a principled modeling framework for the task representation space and the sample representation space. Next, we propose a straightforward yet effective architectural modification: CoQE, a Transformer with separate Co ntext-Query Encoding. The CoQE model consists of two modules: a shared sample encoder ϕθ and a dedicated task encoder ωθ ,as shown in Figure 3 (b). The sample encoder generates general-purpose representations for all samples, including the query. We implement it with a token-wise module, for it should process samples independently without considering context. The task encoder, on the other hand, operates on the general representations of the context and focuses on producing the representation of the current task. Thus this module should be contextual and has the capability to condense sequential information. Finally, the prediction output is ob-tained by computing the inner product between the task representation and the query sample representation. Taking the regression task as an example, the formalization of CoQE output is as follows: 

ˆyq = ⟨ ωθ ( ϕθ (z1: n) ) , ϕ θ (xq ) ⟩. (14) 9Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026) Figure 3 compares the architectures of the Transformer and CoQE. The Transformer also contains token-wise components like feed-forward networks, and contextual components like multi-head attention modules. When stacked, these modules collectively exhibit contextual behavior, and the final token output intertwines with the context information in a complex manner during the forward pass. In contrast, CoQE explicitly separates the contextual and token-wise parts, which are responsible for learning the task representation space and the sample representation space, respectively. The two spaces interact through a well-defined inner product according to the Riesz representation theorem. We aim to evaluate our model on regression tasks for ICL performance, and few-shot classification tasks for ICL-IWL performance. In the following, we will give the specific implementation of CoQE. Notably, due to their different properties, the task encoder constructs the task representation space in distinct ways. 

6.1 Implementation for Regression Transformer                 

> class vectors (modified)
> label 0 1234567
> “2” “2” “6”
> context embed
> Task
> Encoder
> class vectors
> label 0 1234567
> static
> dynamic
> noise

Figure 4: Construction and training of the task Rep-resentation space for few-shot classification. We employ a two-layer ReLU network as the sample encoder of CoQE, and a GPT-2–style Transformer as the task encoder. We take the final output token of the task encoder directly as the task representa-tion induced by the context. The regression output is then computed as the inner product between it and the query sample representation. For fair com-parison, the baseline Transformer is also equipped with the same two-layer ReLU embedding module. See Appendix B.2 for more implementation details. 

6.2 Implementation for Few-shot Classification 

We use a ResNet as CoQE’s sample encoder, and a Transfromer as the task encoder. The task repre-sentation space is constructed in a distinct way from regression. A multi-class classification task can be regarded as a collection of sub-tasks that identify each class. Thus, we let it correspond to a set of task representations, each of which is associated with one class. ICL requires producing the task representations corresponding to the classes in the context, whereas IWL requires static memorization of all classes. To construct a task representation set compatible with both, we assign a parameterized vector to each class, representing a static version of its task representation. In each forward pass, the classes appearing in the context are encoded by the task encoder to obtain their corresponding task representations, as illustrated in Figure 4. These dynamic vectors replace the corresponding static class vectors, and modified class vectors are used to compute logits for prediction. The resulting training loss is denoted as Lmod . Additionally, to accelerate the training of the static class vectors, we compute an additional set of logits from the unmodified class vectors during training, with the resulting classification loss denoted as Lorig . These logits are not used during testing. Therefore, the total training loss is Lmod +Lorig . During experiments, we observed that Lmod tends to converge to Lorig , which means the task encoder fails to dynamically encode the context over training, and the learning of the task representation space is restricted to the set of static class vectors. To prevent the task representation space from collapsing during training, we add Gaussian noise ϵ to the modified logits during training, with the variance increasing over training steps. The initial noise follows N (μ0, 1) . This trick can be interpreted as indirectly performing random sampling in the task representation space, that is, ⟨ωf , ϕ (x)⟩ + ϵ = ⟨ωf + ϵ′, ϕ (x)⟩. Through it we maintain a dynamic task representation space. See Section 7.2 for experimental results and ablation studies. 

# 7 Experiments 

In this section, we first evaluate the ICL performance of CoQE on regression tasks. Then we evaluate ICL-IWL performance on the synthetic classification task and our newly designed pseudo-arithmetic task. 10 Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026) 11/23/2025 例会报告 -陈冠宇 -第15 周 99 

(a) In -distribution testing    

> Linear Sparse linear 2-layer NN Combination

(b) Out -of -distribution testing   

> Scaled Scaled Scaled Different orthants

Figure 5: Results of ICL regression. We provide optimal baselines for test settings except for combination functions. CoQE consistently achieves lower ICL error than the Transformer in both ID and OOD scenarios. 

7.1 Regression 

Setup. We adopt a general framework for training models to perform ICL over a function class F. To construct training prompts, we first sample a task function f ∼ D train  

> F

, then draw k i.i.d. inputs x1, . . . , xk ∼Dtrain  

> X

. The prompt is formed as P = ( x1, f (x1), . . . , xk, f (xk)) . Let Pi denotes the prefix containing the first 

i input-output examples and the (i + 1) th input: Pi = ( x1, f (x1), . . . , xi, f (xi), xi+1 ). The training objective of a model Mθ minimizes the expected loss over all possible prefixes: 

min  

> θ

EP

[

1

k

> k−1

∑

> i=0

ℓ(Mθ (Pi), f (xi+1 ))]

,

where ℓ(·, ·) is a mean squared error (MSE) loss function. At test time, we first sample a test function 

f ∼ D test  

> F

, then draw j ≤ k − 1 inputs x1, . . . , xj ∼ D test  

> X

, and xq from Dquery to construct the test prompt: 

Pj 

> test

= ( x1, f (x1), . . . , xj , f (xj ), xq ). Then we measure the MSE between Mθ (Pj

> test

) and f (xq ).To compare ICL capability of CoQE with the standard Transformer, we consider two major evaluation scenarios: in-distribution (ID) testing and out-of-distribution (OOD) testing. For ID testing, we set Dtrain  

> X

=

Dtest  

> X

= Dquery , and Dtrain  

> F

= Dtest  

> F

. Specifically, we use the following four classes of functions F: linear functions, sparse linear functions, two-layer ReLU networks and combination functions. The latter two classes of nonlinear functions allow the model to reduce ICL difficulty by learning task-invariant representations. Through them, we can empirically validate Theorem 5.6, which shows the benefits of dual-space modeling for representation learning. For OOD testing, we consider four different cases of distribution shifts under linear functions. See Appendix B.2 for more setup details. 

Results. In the ID scenario, CoQE consistently achieves lower ICL error than the Transformer (Figure 5 (a)). For regression on more challenging combination functions, the Transformer exhibits substantial fluc-tuations, whereas CoQE attains much smaller error variance. We attribute this to CoQE’s more effective 11 Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026) (a) Results under different burstiness (b) Results under different Zipfian distribution 

> CoQE
> Transformer
> CoQE
> Transformer

Figure 6: Learning curves of synthetic few-shot classification under different data distribution factors. learning of the sample representation space, and present further results in Appendix B.2. In the OOD scenario, CoQE also achieves substantially lower error than the Transformer across all four tested cases (Figure 5 (b)). Notably, the second case is adapted from Mittal et al. (2025), who similarly aims to enforce the model to explicitly learn task variables. However, they found no improvement in OOD performance, contrary to our results. This indicates that simply introducing task variables is insufficient and highlights the value of our proposed dual-space modeling and corresponding architecture design. 

7.2 Synthetic Few-shot Classification 

Baselines. Besides standard Transformers, we introduce two more baselines that were proposed to alle-viate the tension between ICL and IWL: L2 regularization (Singh et al., 2023) and probabilistic temporary forgetting (Anand et al., 2025). 

Results. Figure 1 top right presents the ICL and IWL accuracies of Transformers and CoQE under various factors after 100 k training steps. The Transformers fluctuate between ICL and IWL capabilities across different conditions, whereas our models robustly occupy the upper-right blue region, indicating a Pareto improvement in both abilities. The other two baselines perform even worse than the standard Transformer; for clarity, we omit them from the figure, and report the detailed results in Appendix B.3. Figure 6 shows the learning curves under different values of Pbursty and Zipfian exponent. We could observe that CoQE’s ICL accuracy rises rapidly at the beginning, but declines slightly between 10 k and 30 k steps. This behavior aligns with prior findings on ICL strategy: it emerges quickly and then gradually fades (Singh et al., 2023). However, under our algorithm, the model quickly restrains this fading trend and continues to recover steadily. We also discuss the effect of parameter scale, showing that CoQE outperforms the standard Transformer under the same parameter budget, and its performance continues to improve as the model size increases. All detailed results are presented in Appendix B.3. 

Ablation study. We study the effect of Gaussian noise on the model performance, as shown in Table 1. Without any noise, the model’s ICL ability ultimately yields entirely to IWL. When μ0 = 5 , the model achieves maximal ICL performance while retaining high IWL capability. This is the default noise magnitude used in our experiments. See Appendix B.3 for more analysis and details. 

7.3 Extending to Language Model Token Embeddings 

To further verify the generality of our approach and explore its potential extension to natural language pro-cessing (NLP) tasks, we are inspired by Singh et al. (2023) and extend our few-shot classification experiments from images to token embeddings of large language models (LLMs). we construct a fixed token embedding dataset through selection and clustering for token embedding matrix of Llama series (Dubey et al., 2024), see Appendix B.4 for details. Compared with Omniglot images, this dataset has larger intra-class variability and preserves meaningful semantic information relevant to NLP tasks. We fix the training data distribution 12 Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026) Table 1: Results under different noises. We use μ0 = 5 as default noise magnitude. 

ICL IWL Noise-free 55.12 99.62 

μ0 = 3 81.91 95.31 

μ0 = 5 91.15 89.30 

μ0 = 7 88.22 77.70 

μ0 = 9 86.01 72.62 

Table 2: Results of using language token embeddings. 

Token Embedding Model ICL IWL Llama-3.1-8B Transformer 50 .12 96 .65 

CoQE 65 .35 93 .96 

Llama-3.2-3B Transformer 49 .33 98 .81 

CoQE 75 .01 96 .57 

Llama-3.2-1B Transformer 49 .95 99 .12 

CoQE 80 .08 97 .34 Condition: 15 + 23 = 38. 43 + 43 = 86. 17 + 5 = 22.                  

> Question: Chef cooked 17 steaks and 5burgers.
> How many dishes did he cook? Answer: __
> 22
> Condition: 15 + 23 = 38. Y + F = C .17 + 5 = 22.
> Question: Chef cooked Ysteaks and Fburgers.
> How many dishes did he cook? Answer: __
> Prompt of Fine -Tuning and IWL Eval
> Prompt of ICL Eval
> Conditional Pseudo -Arithmetic Task
> Generate with
> info in weights
> C
> Generate without
> prior info in weights

Figure 7: (Left) Overview of our conditional pseudo-arithmetic task. (Right) Training curves of CoQE and three baselines. The IWL accuracy of CoQE improves more slowly, because its learning paradigm differs from the model’s original autoregressive pre-training. However, after fine-tuning, all methods achieve nearly 

100% IWL performance, and CoQE achieves substantially higher ICL accuracy. parameters at Pbursty = 0 .9 and Zipfian exponent α = 1 , to approximate natural language distributions. The results in Table 2 show that the Transformer almost fails to acquire ICL ability, consistent with Singh et al. (2023). In contrast, CoQE achieves substantially better ICL capability while maintaining strong IWL performance. We believe these results demonstrate that our dual spaces encoding can enhance ICL capability and mitigate the ICL–IWL conflict in NLP scenarios where semantic information is richer. 

7.4 Conditional Pseudo-Arithmetic Task 

To further verify the generalization ability of our algorithm on generative tasks and pretrained models, we designed a conditional pseudo-arithmetic task, inspired by Anand et al. (2025) and Chen et al. (2025). We construct sequences consisting of arithmetic conditions followed by a word problem, as shown in Figure 7. Here, the question can be answered solely based on the given conditions. We fine-tune GPT-2 on 5,000 such sequences and evaluate its accuracy on the same distribution, which we interpret as its IWL performance. After fine-tuning, we then construct sequences that mix standard arithmetic with “pseudo-arithmetic” over letters. In this case, the model must rely on the contextual relation given in the sequence (rather than memorized weights) to answer correctly, which we use to measure ICL performance. In this setup, xi and 

xq are generalized from single tokens to sequence-level inputs. We extend CoQE to the pretrained GPT-2 as follows. During fine-tuning, we modify the attention mask so that tokens in the Question field cannot attend to the Condition field, thereby implementing separate Context–Query Encoding. On the output side, we largely follow the implementation for few-shot classifica-tion. The difference is that we do not introduce Lorig or noise injection, because we observe that fine-tuning pretrained GPT-2 on this dataset is fast and stable. Besides standard fine-tuning, we also introduce L2

13 Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026) regularization and probabilistic temporary forgetting as baselines. All models are fine-tuned for 300 steps. The training curves are shown in Figure 7 right. After fine-tuning, all methods achieve nearly 100% IWL performance, while CoQE achieves substantially higher ICL accuracy than the other three baselines. A typical failure mode we observe is using the wrong condition, for example: "Condition: 42 + 4 = 46. 31 + 20 = 51. L + Y = E. Question: I read L pages yesterday and Y pages today. How many pages did I read? Answer: 51." This indicates that the model is still limited in leveraging the correct in-context relation in this scenario. Moreover, L2 regularization and probabilistic temporary forgetting perform even worse than vanilla fine-tuning. This demonstrate limitations of their design: regularization can take effect at very large training steps (e.g., 10 7), and probabilistic temporary forgetting targets ICL settings that involve random-vector inputs, which differs from our pseudo-arithmetic setting. Overall, this simple autoregressive experiment further validates the effectiveness and transferability of CoQE on generative tasks and pretrained models. 

# 8 Discussion 

Our analyses and experiments primarily focus on small models. A natural question is whether large models exhibit similar imbalance between ICL and IWL. Piantadosi (2014) showed that a Zipfian distribution of 

α = 1 closely approximates the empirical distribution of natural language, which serves as a sweet spot for the tradeoff between ICL and IWL (Chan et al., 2022). Nevertheless, Chan et al. (2025) pointed out that LLMs can still experience conflicts between ICL and IWL when demonstration examples deviate from the training distribution. Beyond this, the growing demand for multimodal large models (e.g., VLMs, VLAs) trained on increasingly diverse data distributions, as well as the emergence of new architectures, makes it less tenable to rely on the fortunate coincidence of natural language statistics to balance ICL and IWL. These considerations underscore the importance of our exploration in this direction. 

Limitations. Theoretically, a limitation of our work is that our modeling is built upon the linear represen-tation hypothesis. Although this assumption also underlies many other theoretical and empirical studies, its applicability to complex NLP tasks like multi-step reasoning still requires further evidence. Another limitation is that our dual-space formulation currently assumes that the answer y q is a single value rather than a sequence. Extending the theoretical modeling to handle open-ended generation tasks is valuable. Emperically, the main limitation is that the evaluation of our algorithm has so far been confined to structural synthetic experiments. For tasks where such a context–query decomposition is not available or not well defined, our current algorithm does not yet provide an effective way to apply dual-space modeling. Extending our algorithm to broader general NLP or multimodal settings is also an important direction for future work. 

Broader Impact Statement 

Reconciling ICL and IWL under diverse conditions is crucial for the robustness of large models as data distributions grow more varied and architectures evolve. This work aims to enhance generalization and reliability of large models, contributing to safer and more equitable deployment in real-world applications. 

Acknowledgments 

This work was supported in part by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (No. 2024YDLN0006), in part by the National Key Research and Development Program of China under STI 2030—Major Projects (No. 2021ZD0200300), and in part by the Tsinghua-Fuzhou Data Technology Joint Research Institute (Project No. JIDT2024013). 

# References 

Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 , 2023. 14 Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026) Kartik Ahuja and David Lopez-Paz. A closer look at in-context learning under distribution shifts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16704 , 2023. Suraj Anand, Michael A Lepori, Jack Merullo, and Ellie Pavlick. Dual process learning: Controlling use of in-context vs. in-weights strategies with weight forgetting. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. Trenton Bricken, Rylan Schaeffer, Bruno Olshausen, and Gabriel Kreiman. Emergence of sparse representa-tions from noise. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 3148–3191. PMLR, 2023. Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. 

Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:1877–1901, 2020. Dake Bu, Wei Huang, Andi Han, Atsushi Nitanda, Qingfu Zhang, Hau-San Wong, and Taiji Suzuki. Provable in-context vector arithmetic via retrieving task concepts. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning , 2025. Bryan Chan, Xinyi Chen, András György, and Dale Schuurmans. Toward understanding in-context vs. in-weight learning. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. Stephanie Chan, Adam Santoro, Andrew Lampinen, Jane Wang, Aaditya Singh, Pierre Richemond, James McClelland, and Felix Hill. Data distributional properties drive emergent in-context learning in trans-formers. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:18878–18891, 2022. Guanyu Chen, Peiyang Wang, Yizhou Jiang, Yuqian Liu, Chujie Zhao, Ying Fang, Tianren Zhang, and Feng Chen. Exploring the hidden reasoning process of large language models by misleading them. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP , 2025. Siyu Chen, Heejune Sheen, Tianhao Wang, and Zhuoran Yang. Unveiling induction heads: Provable training dynamics and feature learning in transformers. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 37, pp. 66479–66567. Curran Associates, Inc., 2024. Hoagy Cunningham, Aidan Ewart, Logan Riggs, Robert Huben, and Lee Sharkey. Sparse autoencoders find highly interpretable features in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.08600 , 2023. Fahim Dalvi, Abdul Rafae Khan, Firoj Alam, Nadir Durrani, Jia Xu, and Hassan Sajjad. Discovering latent concepts learned in bert. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2022. Danny Driess, Fei Xia, Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Corey Lynch, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Brian Ichter, Ayzaan Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Quan Vuong, Tianhe Yu, et al. Palm-e: an embodied multimodal language model. In 

Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 8469–8488, 2023. Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv e-prints ,pp. arXiv–2407, 2024. Ying Fan, Steve Yadlowsky, Dimitris Papailiopoulos, and Kangwook Lee. Transformers can learn meta-skills for task generalization in in-context learning. In NeurIPS 2024 Workshop on Compositional Learning: Perspectives, Methods, and Paths Forward , 2024. Shivam Garg, Dimitris Tsipras, Percy Liang, and Gregory Valiant. What can transformers learn in-context? A case study of simple function classes. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=flNZJ2eOet .Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu, Shirong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, et al. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948 , 2025. 15 Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026) Tianyu Guo, Wei Hu, Song Mei, Huan Wang, Caiming Xiong, Silvio Savarese, and Yu Bai. How do trans-formers learn in-context beyond simple functions? a case study on learning with representations. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. Wes Gurnee and Max Tegmark. Language models represent space and time. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. Seungwook Han, Jinyeop Song, Jeff Gore, and Pulkit Agrawal. Emergence and effectiveness of task vectors in in-context learning: An encoder decoder perspective. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning , 2025. Roee Hendel, Mor Geva, and Amir Globerson. In-context learning creates task vectors. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 , pp. 9318–9333, 2023. Yihan Hu, Jiazhi Yang, Li Chen, Keyu Li, Chonghao Sima, Xizhou Zhu, Siqi Chai, Senyao Du, Tianwei Lin, Wenhai Wang, et al. Planning-oriented autonomous driving. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 17853–17862, 2023. Ruomin Huang and Rong Ge. Task descriptors help transformers learn linear models in-context. In ICML 2024 Workshop on In-Context Learning , 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=4SfCI1DJhr .Juno Kim and Taiji Suzuki. Transformers learn nonlinear features in context: Nonconvex mean-field dy-namics on the attention landscape. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 24527–24561. PMLR, 2024. Jannik Kossen, Yarin Gal, and Tom Rainforth. In-context learning learns label relationships but is not conventional learning. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. URL 

https://openreview.net/forum?id=YPIA7bgd5y .Brenden M. Lake, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Joshua B. Tenenbaum. Human-level concept learning through probabilistic program induction. Science , 350(6266):1332–1338, 2015. Yuchen Li, Yuanzhi Li, and Andrej Risteski. How do transformers learn topic structure: Towards a mech-anistic understanding. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 19689–19729, 2023. Haodong Liang, Krishna Balasubramanian, and Lifeng Lai. Transformers handle endogeneity in in-context linear regression. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. Muhammad Maaz, Hanoona Rasheed, Salman Khan, and Fahad Khan. Video-chatgpt: Towards detailed video understanding via large vision and language models. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 12585–12602, 2024. Samuel Marks and Max Tegmark. The geometry of truth: Emergent linear structure in large language model representations of true/false datasets. In First Conference on Language Modeling , 2024. URL 

https://openreview.net/forum?id=aajyHYjjsk .Jack Merullo, Carsten Eickhoff, and Ellie Pavlick. Language models implement simple word2vec-style vector arithmetic. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 5030–5047, 2024. Tomáš Mikolov, Wen-tau Yih, and Geoffrey Zweig. Linguistic regularities in continuous space word rep-resentations. In Proceedings of the 2013 conference of the north american chapter of the association for computational linguistics: Human language technologies , pp. 746–751, 2013. Sarthak Mittal, Eric Elmoznino, Leo Gagnon, Sangnie Bhardwaj, Guillaume Lajoie, and Dhanya Sridhar. Does learning the right latent variables necessarily improve in-context learning? In Forty-second Interna-tional Conference on Machine Learning , 2025. 16 Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026) Neel Nanda, Andrew Lee, and Martin Wattenberg. Emergent linear representations in world models of self-supervised sequence models. EMNLP 2023 , pp. 16, 2023. Alex Nguyen and Gautam Reddy. Differential learning kinetics govern the transition from memorization to generalization during in-context learning. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. Eshaan Nichani, Alex Damian, and Jason D Lee. How transformers learn causal structure with gradient descent. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 38018–38070, 2024. Kazusato Oko, Yujin Song, Taiji Suzuki, and Denny Wu. Pretrained transformer efficiently learns low-dimensional target functions in-context. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=uHcG5Y6fdB .Jane Pan, Tianyu Gao, Howard Chen, and Danqi Chen. What in-context learning "learns" in-context: Disentangling task recognition and task learning. In The 61st Annual Meeting Of The Association For Computational Linguistics , 2023. Madhur Panwar, Kabir Ahuja, and Navin Goyal. In-context learning through the bayesian prism. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. Core Francisco Park, Ekdeep Singh Lubana, and Hidenori Tanaka. Competition dynamics shape algorithmic phases of in-context learning. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations ,2025. Kiho Park, Yo Joong Choe, and Victor Veitch. The linear representation hypothesis and the geometry of large language models. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 235, pp. 39643–39666, 2024. Steven T Piantadosi. Zipf’s word frequency law in natural language: A critical review and future directions. 

Psychonomic bulletin & review , 21(5):1112–1130, 2014. Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Improving language understanding by generative pre-training. OpenAI blog , 2018. Gautam Reddy. The mechanistic basis of data dependence and abrupt learning in an in-context classification task. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. Zhenmei Shi, Junyi Wei, Zhuoyan Xu, and Yingyu Liang. Why larger language models do in-context learning differently? In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 44991–45013, 2024. Aaditya Singh, Stephanie Chan, Ted Moskovitz, Erin Grant, Andrew Saxe, and Felix Hill. The transient nature of emergent in-context learning in transformers. Advances in neural information processing systems ,36:27801–27819, 2023. Aaditya K Singh, Ted Moskovitz, Sara Dragutinović, Felix Hill, Stephanie CY Chan, and Andrew M Saxe. Strategy coopetition explains the emergence and transience of in-context learning. In Forty-second Inter-national Conference on Machine Learning , 2025. Yuandong Tian, Yiping Wang, Beidi Chen, and Simon S Du. Scan and snap: Understanding training dynamics and token composition in 1-layer transformer. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36, pp. 71911–71947, 2023. Eric Todd, Millicent Li, Arnab Sen Sharma, Aaron Mueller, Byron C Wallace, and David Bau. Function vectors in large language models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations ,2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=AwyxtyMwaG .17 Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026) Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Ł ukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 30, 2017. Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, et al. Transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing. EMNLP 2020 , pp. 38, 2020. Jingfeng Wu, Difan Zou, Zixiang Chen, Vladimir Braverman, Quanquan Gu, and Peter Bartlett. How many pretraining tasks are needed for in-context learning of linear regression? In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. Zheyang Xiong, Ziyang Cai, John Cooper, Albert Ge, Vasilis Papageorgiou, Zack Sifakis, Angeliki Giannou, Ziqian Lin, Liu Yang, Saurabh Agarwal, et al. Everything everywhere all at once: Llms can in-context learn multiple tasks in superposition. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning ,2025. Steve Yadlowsky, Lyric Doshi, and Nilesh Tripuraneni. Pretraining data mixtures enable narrow model selection capabilities in transformer models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.00871 , 2023. Liu Yang, Ziqian Lin, Kangwook Lee, Dimitris Papailiopoulos, and Robert Nowak. Task vectors in in-context learning: Emergence, formation, and benefit. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.09240 , 2025. Naimeng Ye, Hanming Yang, Andrew Siah, and Hongseok Namkoong. Pre-training and in-context learning is bayesian inference a la de finetti. arXiv preprint arXiv: 2408.03307 , 2024. Tian Ye, Zicheng Xu, Yuanzhi Li, and Zeyuan Allen-Zhu. Physics of language models: Part 2.1, grade-school math and the hidden reasoning process. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. Ruiqi Zhang, Spencer Frei, and Peter L Bartlett. Trained transformers learn linear models in-context. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 25(49):1–55, 2024a. Tianren Zhang, Chujie Zhao, Guanyu Chen, Yizhou Jiang, and Feng Chen. Feature contamination: Neural networks learn uncorrelated features and fail to generalize. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 60446–60495. PMLR, 2024b. Tianren Zhang, Guanyu Chen, and Feng Chen. When do neural networks learn world models? In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning , 2025a. Yufeng Zhang, Fengzhuo Zhang, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. What and how does in-context learn-ing learn? bayesian model averaging, parameterization, and generalization. In The 28th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , 2025b. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id= B50OF0Fc6O .Brianna Zitkovich, Tianhe Yu, Sichun Xu, Peng Xu, Ted Xiao, Fei Xia, Jialin Wu, Paul Wohlhart, Stefan Welker, Ayzaan Wahid, et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. In CoRL , 2023. 18 Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026) 

# A Proofs of Theoretical Results 

A.1 Proof of Proposition 5.3 

For ease of presentation, we first restate the proposition and then introduce its proof. 

Proposition A.1 (Task-sample duality) . Let X be the input space and Yf the multiple label sets corre-sponding to each task f ∈ F . Under Definition 5.2, there exists a linear sample representation space MF

and a linear task transformation space T , where T is the dual space of MF , i.e. T = M∗F .Proof. To prove the proposition, we must show that the linear task transformation space T is equivalent to the dual space of the linear sample representation space MF , denoted as M∗F . The proof proceeds by demonstrating mutual inclusion: (1) T ⊆ M ∗F and (2) M∗F ⊆ T .

Step 1: Proof of T ⊆ M ∗F . Let t be an arbitrary element in the task transformation space T . According to Definition 5.2, t is a linear function such that 

t(m) = ⟨ωt, m ⟩, ∀m ∈ M F .

Since t is a linear functional on MF , it is by definition an element of M ∗F . As t was an arbitrary element of T , it follows that every element in T corresponds to a unique linear functional in M ∗F . Thus, we have established that T ⊆ M ∗F .

Step 2: Proof of M∗F ⊆ T . Conversely, let t′ be an arbitrary linear functional in the dual space M∗F . By Definition 5.1, MF is a finite-dimensional inner product space. By the Riesz representation theorem, for any linear functional t′ ∈ M ∗F , there exists a unique vector, let’s call it ωt′ ∈ M F , such that for all m ∈ M F :

t′(m) = ⟨ωt′ , m ⟩.

Now, let us define a function ft′ : X → R using this functional t′:

ft′ (x) = t′(ϕF (x)) = ⟨ωt′ , ϕ F (x)⟩.

This function ft′ has the exact mathematical form of a task function as specified in Definition 5.2. Therefore, 

ft′ can be considered a valid task belonging to the task function space F. Definition 5.2 states that for any such task ft′ ∈ F , there exists a unique linear task representation vector, which we denote ωf , that represents it. This means: 

ft′ (x) = ⟨ωf , ϕ F (x)⟩.

By equating the two expressions for ft′ (x), we obtain: 

⟨ωt′ , ϕ F (x)⟩ = ⟨ωf , ϕ F (x)⟩, ∀x ∈ X 

This implies that ⟨ωt′ − ωf , m ⟩ = 0 for all m in the image of ϕF . Since the sample representation space MF

is spanned by the image of ϕF , this condition holds for all m ∈ M F . The only vector orthogonal to every vector in an inner product space is the zero vector. Therefore: 

⟨ωt′ − ωf , m ⟩ = 0 = ⇒ ωt′ = ωf .

Since ωf corresponds to an element of T , it follows that ωt′ is also corresponds to an element of T , and thus 

t′ ∈ T . As our choice of t′ was arbitrary, we have shown that every linear functional in M∗F corresponds to an element in T . Thus, we have established that M∗F ⊆ T .

A.2 Proof of Theorem 5.6 

For ease of presentation, we first restate the theorem and then introduce its proof. 19 Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026) 

Theorem A.2 (Completeness of basis representations under task traversal) . Under Proposition 5.3, we assume that a learner with sample representation mapping ϕθ is presented with a task traversal curriculum C

such that: span {t | t ∈ C } = T . Then, if the learner achieves zero empirical error, the learned representation mapping ϕθ satisfies: span {ϕθ (x) | x ∈ X } = MF .Proof. By Proposition 5.3, fix a basis {mi}di=1 of MF and its dual basis {ti}di=1 ⊂ T , satisfying ti(mj ) = 

⟨ωi, m j ⟩ = δij . For any m ∈ M F write the unique decomposition m = ∑di=1 αi(m) mi and for any t ∈ T 

write t = ∑di=1 βi(t) ti. The bilinear pairing then reduces to 

t(m) = 

> d

∑

> i=1

αi(m) βi(t). (15) Let ϕF : X → M F denote the sample representation guaranteed by Definition 5.2, and define the coordinate vectors 

αθ (x) ≜ (α1(ϕθ (x)) , . . . , α d(ϕθ (x))) ∈ Rd, α∗(x) ≜ (α1(ϕF (x)) , . . . , α d(ϕF (x))) ∈ Rd.

Zero empirical error on every curriculum task t ∈ C means 

t(ϕθ (x)) = t(ϕF (x)) for all t ∈ C and all training x.

By linearity of Equation 15 this equality holds for any linear combination of curriculum tasks; hence it holds for all t ∈ span( C) = T :

t(ϕθ (x)) = t(ϕF (x)) , ∀ t ∈ T . (16) Take in Equation 16 the particular choice t = ti (the i-th dual basis functional). Using ti(m) = αi(m) from Equation 15, we obtain for every x and every i ∈ [d],

αi(ϕθ (x)) = ti(ϕθ (x)) = ti(ϕF (x)) = αi(ϕF (x)) .

Thus αθ (x) = α∗(x) pointwise for all (training) x. Consequently ϕθ (x) and ϕF (x) have identical coordinates in the basis {mi}di=1 for all x, so 

span {ϕθ (x) | x ∈ X } = span {ϕF (x) | x ∈ X } .

Without loss of generality, take MF = span {ϕF (x) | x ∈ X } . Therefore span {ϕθ (x) | x ∈ X } = MF ,proving the claim. 

A.3 Proof of Proposition 5.8 

For ease of presentation, we first restate the proposition and then introduce its proof. 

Proposition A.3 (Closed form of ωf under simplified LSA) . Consider an LSA layer applied after a feature encoder ϕ : X → Rd implemented by an MLP. Suppose the LSA projection matrices WKQ and WOA are initialized such that 

WOV =

( ∗ ∗

0⊤ 

> d

1

)

, WKQ =

( Θ 0d

0⊤ 

> d

∗

)

.

Then the final prediction takes the form ˆy = ⟨ωf (z1: n, ϕ ), ϕ (xq )⟩, where 

ωf (z1: n, ϕ ) = 1

n

> n

∑

> i=1

yiΘ⊤ϕ(xi). (17) 

Proof. According to Kim & Suzuki (2024), under the conditions of Proposition 5.8, the expression of ˆy is given as follows: 

ˆy = 1

n

> n

∑

> i=1

yiϕ(xi)⊤Θϕ(xq ). (18) Hence, Proposition 5.8 is readily proved. 20 Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026) 

A.4 Proof of Theorem 5.9 

For ease of presentation, we first restate the theorem and then introduce its proof. 

Theorem A.4 (Entangled structure under general SA) . For a standard SA model with softmax-based at-tention weights, there does NOT exist a pair of ϕ0 and ω0(z1: n, ϕ 0), such that the model prediction admits the following decomposition: 

ˆyq = ⟨ω0(z1: n, ϕ 0), ϕ 0(xq )⟩. (19) 

Proof. We argue by contradiction. Assume there exists a finite-dimensional feature map ϕ0 and a context-only coefficient vector ω0(z1: n, ϕ 0) such that the identity holds for all contexts and queries. 

Step 1: From SA equations to a ratio of exponentials in xq . Let the sequence length be L = n+1 .Stack token embeddings as Z = [ z1, . . . , zn, zq ] ∈ Rd×L. A single-head self-attention (SA) layer computes 

Q = WQZ, K = WK Z, V = WV Z, 

with Q, K ∈ Rdk ×L, V ∈ Rdv ×L. Denote the i-th key/value columns by ki := K:i = WK zi, vi := V:i = WV zi,and the query column at position q by q := Q:L = WQzq . The attention weights for the query position form a probability vector α(q) ∈ ∆n with coordinates 

αi(q) = exp (⟨ki, q ⟩/√dk

)∑Lj=1 exp (⟨kj , q ⟩/√dk

), i = 1 , . . . , L. (20) In the theoretical analysis of ICL, it is common to set zq = [ xq , 0] . Without loss of generality, we assume that the query token embedding depends affinely on the input feature xq ∈ Rdx :

zq = Exxq + rq ,

where Ex ∈ Rd×dx is a fixed embedding matrix and rq ∈ Rd could collect position encodings and other context-independent parts at position q. Then the query vector is also affine in xq :

q = WQzq = WQEx xq + WQrq = U xq + u0,

with U := WQEx ∈ Rdk ×dx and u0 := WQrq ∈ Rdk . Plugging q = U xq + u0 into the logits in Equation 20 yields, for each key i,

⟨ki, q ⟩√dk

= ⟨ki, U xq ⟩√dk

+ ⟨ki, u 0⟩√dk

= a⊤ 

> i

xq + bi(z),

where we define the (query–input) slope and the (context) offset by 

ai := U ⊤ki

√dk

∈ Rdx , bi(z) := ⟨ki, u 0⟩√dk

∈ R.

Hence, for a fixed context z1: n (which fixes all ki and u0), the attention weights are softmax of affine functions of xq :

αi(xq ; z) = exp (a⊤ 

> i

xq + bi(z))∑Lj=1 exp (a⊤ 

> j

xq + bj (z)), i = 1 , . . . , L. (21) The SA output at the query position is hq = zq + WO

∑Li=1 αi(xq ; z) vi. For a fixed linear predictor w ∈ Rd

(or equivalently choosing a fixed output coordinate), the scalar prediction is 

ˆyq (xq ) = w⊤hq = w⊤zq

︸ ︷︷ ︸  

> affine in xq

+

> L

∑

> i=1

(w⊤WO vi

)︸ ︷︷ ︸ 

> := γi(z)

αi(xq ; z). (22) If we choose w orthogonal to Im( Ex) (always possible unless Ex = 0 ), then w⊤zq = w⊤(Exxq + rq ) = w⊤rq

is a context-only constant; denote c(z) := w⊤rq . With γ(z) := ( γ1(z), . . . , γ L(z)) ⊤, Equation 22 simplifies to 

ˆyq (xq ) = c(z) + γ(z)⊤α(xq ; z), (23) where α(·; z) is given by the ratio-of-exponentials form in Equation 21. This exhibits the claimed dependence of ˆyq on xq through a softmax over affine functions of xq .21 Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026) 

Step 2: A two-key reduction yields a linearly independent logistic family. Specialize to dx = 1 

and one context keys ( n = 1 ) with a1̸ = a2. Choose WO , V so that c(z) ≡ 0 and γ1(z) = 1 , γ 2(z) = 0 . Then Equation 23 reduces to 

ˆyq (xq ) = exp( a1xq + b1(z)) exp( a1xq + b1(z)) + exp( a2xq + b2(z)) = 11 + t(z) e−axq ,

where a := a1 − a2̸ = 0 and t(z) := exp (b2(z) − b1(z)) > 0. As the context varies, t(z) can take arbitrarily many distinct positive values, so SA realizes the one-parameter family of functions 

F =

{

ft(x) := 11 + te −ax : t > 0

}

.

Fix distinct t1, . . . , t m > 0. Suppose there exist scalars λ1, . . . , λ m with ∑mi=1 λifti (x) ≡ 0 for all x ∈ R.Multiplying both sides by ∏mi=1 (1 + tie−ax) and letting s = e−ax gives the polynomial identity 

> m

∑

> i=1

λi

∏ 

> j̸=i

(1 + tj s) ≡ 0 for all s > 0.

A polynomial that vanishes on an infinite set is identically zero; hence the identity holds for all s ∈ R.Evaluating at s = −1/t k yields 

λk

∏ 

> j̸=k

(

1 − tj

tk

)

= 0 .

Since the ti are distinct, each product is nonzero, forcing λk = 0 for all k. Thus ft1 , . . . , f tm are linearly independent. Consequently, the linear span of F is infinite-dimensional. 

Step 3: Contradiction with any finite-dimensional bilinear decomposition. If the bilinear decom-position ˆyq (xq ) = ⟨ω0(z), ϕ 0(xq )⟩ held with a fixed feature map ϕ0 : R → Rd (independent of the context), then for all contexts the functions x q 7 → ˆyq (xq ) would lie in the d-dimensional linear span of the coordinate functions of ϕ0. However, Step 2 shows that by varying the context, SA realizes an infinite set F of pairwise linearly independent functions in x, which cannot be contained in any finite-dimensional linear subspace. This contradiction rules out the existence of such (ϕ0, ω 0).

# B Experimental Details and Additional Results 

In this part of the appendix, we provide detailed descriptions of the experiments in the main text and include additional experimental results. 

B.1 Representation Visualization 

To further illustrate the training dynamics in Figure 2 left, we visualize the evolution of representations for three common classes during training under training settings (64 , 12 , 0.9, 2) and (64 , 12 , 0.9, 0) , as shown in Figure 8. We find that under different data distributions, the model’s representation space diverges significantly from the very beginning of training and eventually converges to distinct structure. This clearly reflects that the balance of sample-level and context-level information is highly sensitive to the training distribution. 

B.2 Regression 

Implementation details. We use Transformer architectures from the GPT-2 family (Radford et al., 2018) as implemented by HuggingFace (Wolf et al., 2020). Specifically, the Transformer baseline we use is configured with an embedding dimension of 64 , 3 layers, and 2 attention heads, resulting in a total of 0.2Mparameters. The task encoder of CoQE uses the exact same Transformer configuration. The representation encoder of CoQE consists of a two-layer ReLU network, implemented as a linear projection, followed by a 22 Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026) steps = 3k steps = 10k steps = 50k   

> labeled as 0 in context labeled as 1 in context no support in context

Figure 8: The uncropped visualization results of training dynamics. ReLU activation, a LayerNorm, and a second linear layer. For fair comparison, the baseline Transformer’s embedding module uses the exact same two-layer ReLU network. During training across the four classes of functions, we use a batch size of 64 and a learning rate of 5e − 5. For the three tasks except combination functions, models are trained for 1 × 10 5 steps, while the combination task is trained for 2 × 10 5 steps due to its increased difficulty. All experiments are conducted on an NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU. 

Setup details. We consider two major evaluation scenarios for regression: in-distribution (ID) testing and out-of-distribution (OOD) testing. In the ID scenario, we set Dtrain  

> X

= Dtest  

> X

= Dquery , and Dtrain  

> F

= Dtest  

> F

.Specifically, we use the following four classes of functions F:23 Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026) 

• Linear functions: F = {f | f (x) = w⊤x, w ∈ Rd}, where d = 10 . We sample x1, . . . , xj , xq and 

w independently from the isotropic Gaussian distribution N (0 , I d), then compute f (xi) = w⊤xi to construct the prompt. In this setting we use the least squares estimator as the optimal baseline. 

• Sparse linear functions: F = {f | f (x) = w⊤x, w ∈ Rd, ∥w∥0 ≤ s}, where d = 10 and s = 3 . We also sample x1, . . . , xj , xq and w independently from N (0 , I d), and then zero out all but s coordinates of w uniformly at random. We use the least squares estimator and Lasso, which leverages sparsity with an ℓ1-norm regularizer as baselines. 

• Two-layer ReLU neural networks: F = {f | f (x) = ∑hi=1 ai σ(w⊤ 

> i

x), ai ∈ R, wi ∈ Rd}, where 

σ(z) = max {0, z } is the ReLU activation function, and d = 5 , h = 10 . We sample xis and xq from 

N (0 , I d), along with network parameters a is from N (0 , 2/h ). We sample wis from N (0 , I d), and share them across all tasks in F. The baseline is a two-layer neural network of the same architecture trained on in-context examples using Adam. 

• Combination functions: F = {f | f (x) = w⊤Φ( x), w ∈ R5}, where Φ is an element-wise combina-tion function. For x = [ x1, x2, x3, x4, x5 ], Φ( x) = [ |x1|, x22, x33, cos( πx4), e 0.2 x5 ]⊤. We sample xis, 

xq and w from N (0 , I 5) independently. In this setting, there is no naturally optimal baseline, so we compare only with the Transformer. The latter two classes of nonlinear functions allow the model to reduce ICL difficulty through representation learning, by learning task-invariant wis or Φ.In the OOD scenario, we consider four different cases of distributional shifts under linear functions. 

• Dtrain 

> X

̸ = Dtest  

> X

= Dquery . We consider the setting where the prompt inputs xis’ scale between training and testing is different. We scale them by a factor of 0.8 or 1.2.

• Dtrain  

> X

= Dtest 

> X

̸ = Dquery . We sample the context examples from the same distribution as at training time, but sample xq from a Gaussian distribution with 3× higher standard deviation. 

• Dtest 

> X

̸ = Dtrain  

> X

= Dquery . We fix the sign of each coordinate to be randomly positive or negative for all prompt inputs xis, and draw xq from N (0 , I ) as before. 

• Dtrain 

> F

̸ = Dtest  

> F

. We consider scaling the weight vector by a factor of 0.8 or 1.2, to capture shifts of task functions. Through the above diverse evaluation settings, we comprehensively demonstrate that CoQE consistently exhibits stronger ICL capability than a standard Transformer of comparable size on regression tasks. 

Additional results on representation learning. Our Theorem 5.6 shows that under the dual-space modeling framework, a sufficient set of tasks guarantees a basis-covering sample representation space that the model learns. For empirical validation, we design the task type of two-layer ReLU networks and combination functions, whose different task functions share a common sample representation space in their construction. Figure 5 (a) shows that CoQE indeed achieves a smaller ICL error on these tasks. Furthermore, under the combination functions task, we set the sample representation space dimension of CoQE to 5, matching that of Φ, and directly visualize the 5-dimensional sample representation space learned by CoQE after training (Figure 9). From the figure, we can observe that the five dimensions appear to differentiate in a manner close to the respective transformations of the five dimensions of Φ. Although, due to the equivalence of sample representation spaces under linear transformations, i.e., f = w⊤Φ( x) = w⊤H−1 · HΦ( x) where H denotes an arbitrary invertible matrix, it is essentially impossible for the model to learn Φ with perfectly identical scale and shape. The current differentiation can be regarded as another empirical proof of Theorem 5.6 that our dual-modeling could facilitate learning of the basis-covering sample representation space. 24 Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026) 

Figure 9: The 5-dimensional sample representation space learned by CoQE for the combination functions. 

B.3 Synthetic Few-shot Classification 

Implementation details. In our experiments, we employ ResNets of three sizes (with embedding di-mensions E = 64 , E = 256 and E = 512 ) to encode images. All architectures consist of four groups, each containing two residual blocks. The difference lies in the embedding dimensions of each group: for the E = 64 ResNet, the four groups produce embeddings of sizes 16 , 32 , 32 , and 64 , respectively; for the 

E = 256 ResNet, the sizes are 64 , 128 , 128 , and 256 ; for the E = 512 ResNet, the sizes are 64 , 128 , 256 ,and 512 . Then a fully connected layer is appended to the E = 256 and E = 512 ResNet to project the final embedding dimension back to 64 before feeding it into the Transformer. Larger embedding dimension of Resnets clearly possesses a stronger capacity for extracting visual sample representations. As a result, the resulting embedding tokens are more expressive. For CoQE, we find that the E = 64 ResNet is insufficient for the sample encoder. We also employ two Transformer configurations with different layers: L = 4 and 

L = 12 . Both variants use an embedding dimension of 64 and 8 attention heads. We have shown that CoQE with only an L = 4 Transformer in the task encoder, can match the ICL and IWL performance of an L = 12 

Transformer. In our experiments, a baseline Transformer with E = 64 and L = 12 contains approximately 

0.9M parameters, CoQE with E = 256 and L = 4 has 1.0M parameters, while CoQE with E = 512 and 

L = 4 has 2.0M parameters. When training CoQE, we add Gaussian noise to the modified logits to prevent the task encoder’s output from collapsing to a static vector. Specifically, the initial noise is sampled from N (μ0, 1) , and both the mean and standard deviation are incremented by 1 every 10 4 training steps. During training of baseline Transformers and CoQE, we use a batch size of 24 , a learning rate of 1e − 4, and train for 1 × 10 5 steps. All experiments are conducted on 8× NVIDIA V100 GPUs. 

Detailed results of all settings and baselines. In Table 3, we report the ICL and IWL performance across all model scales, training settings, and algorithms. In Table 4, we report the effect of appropriately scaling both the Transformer and CoQE. These results demonstrates that CoQE can robustly reconcile ICL and IWL 

Ablation study. We present the training curves of CoQE under different levels of noise (Figure 10). It is evident that, in the absence of noise, the model’s ICL capability rapidly decays after an initial emergence, accompanied by a similarly rapid increase in IWL performance. Although this observation is not made under a standard Transformer model, we hypothesize that the underlying phenomenon extends beyond 25 Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026) Table 3: Performance comparison of different Transformer variants and baselines. All values are presented as percentages. The maximum and second-largest values are indicated by boldface and underline, respectively. Model Config Metric Settings (Pbursty , α ) Avg. 

(0 .9, 1) (0 .9, 0) (0 .9, 2) (0 .5, 0) (0 .1, 0) 

Transformer 

E = 64 , L = 12 ICL 84.2 73.1 49.7 64.5 50.5 64.4 #Param: 0.9M IWL 65.1 4.1 98.0 17.8 51.5 47.3 

E = 64 , L = 8 ICL 74.4 67.2 50.2 57.5 50.3 59.9 #Param: 0.6M IWL 65.2 8.1 97.9 21.4 57.9 50.1 

E = 64 , L = 4 ICL 50.0 50.5 50.1 50.2 50.4 50.2 #Param: 0.4M IWL 66.2 15.1 98.1 27.3 63.1 54.0 

E = 256 , L = 12 ICL 49.8 51.4 50.0 50.2 50.5 50.4 #Param: 1.4M IWL 72.3 20.1 98.4 58.1 75.4 64.9 

E = 256 , L = 8 ICL 50.8 50.7 50.2 49.9 50.7 50.5 #Param: 1.2M IWL 73.1 28.7 98.4 60.2 78.5 67.8 

E = 256 , L = 4 ICL 50.0 50.3 50.6 49.9 50.7 50.3 #Param: 1.0M IWL 74.4 38.8 98.6 63.4 81.1 71.3 

E = 512 , L = 12 ICL 50.5 50.5 50.3 50.1 50.5 50.4 #Param: 2.4M IWL 79.6 36.0 98.9 98.4 99.0 82.4 

E = 512 , L = 8 ICL 50.4 49.8 50.3 50.2 51.0 50.3 #Param: 2.2M IWL 81.0 49.3 99.0 98.9 99.1 85.5 

E = 512 , L = 4 ICL 49.9 50.0 51.0 49.5 51.0 50.3 #Param: 2.0M IWL 82.5 62.5 99.1 99.4 99.2 88.5 

Transformer E = 64 , L = 12 ICL 80.0 70.3 49.9 59.8 50.1 62.0 + Noise #Param: 0.9M IWL 60.4 1.2 91.3 8.9 49.9 42.3 Transformer E = 64 , L = 12 ICL 80.5 64.2 50.2 67.8 53.1 63.2 + Regularization #Param: 0.9M IWL 64.9 3.1 63.2 36.4 98.5 53.2 Transformer E = 64 , L = 12 ICL 50.4 51.0 49.8 50.5 51.0 50.5 + Temporary Forgetting #Param: 0.9M IWL 54.8 0.8 97.1 7.2 38.5 39.7 Linear Transformer E = 64 , L = 12 ICL 51.3 51.0 50.0 50.1 50.3 50.5 #Param: 0.8M IWL 68.3 8.0 98.4 21.0 53.5 49.8 CoQE 

E = 256 , L = 4 ICL 90.3 89.2 85.8 88.0 90.3 88.7 #Param: 1.0M IWL 82.0 81.0 63.1 82.0 87.9 79.2 

E = 512 , L = 4 ICL 92.1 91.2 88.0 90.2 92.0 90.7 

#Param: 2.0M IWL 90.0 89.4 67.9 91.0 95.4 86.7 26 Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026) Table 4: The effect of appropriately scaling both the Transformer and CoQE. 

Model Config ICL IWL Trans. ( E = 64 , H = 64 )

L = 12 84.2 65.1 

L = 14 86.5 62.9 

L = 16 73.0 62.9 CoQE ( E = 256 , H = 64 )

L = 4 90.3 82.0 

L = 6 89.3 84.7 

L = 8 89.7 85.2 

Model Config ICL IWL Trans. ( E = 64 , L = 12 )

H = 64 84.2 65.1 

H = 72 51.0 67.4 

H = 80 51.0 68.1 CoQE ( E = 256 , L = 4 )

H = 64 90.3 82.0 

H = 72 92.6 83.0 

H = 80 90.1 82.2 

model architecture, reflecting the intrinsic properties of the two strategies. ICL is a lightweight, dynamic strategy, whereas IWL is more training-intensive but ultimately more stable. In standard Transformers, where the two strategies are difficult to co-exist, training often leads to a transition from ICL to IWL. In contrast, CoQE enables robust coexistence of both strategies through explicit modeling and learning of the task representation space, as well as the use of Gaussian noise to isolate the task-transformations associated with each strategy. 0 20 40 60 80 100      

> # Steps (k)
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> 0.9
> 1.0
> Accuracy
> 0= 0
> 0= 3
> 0= 5
> 0= 7
> 0= 9

(a) ICL accuracy 0 20 40 60 80 100       

> # Steps (k)
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Accuracy
> 0= 0
> 0= 3
> 0= 5
> 0= 7
> 0= 9

(b) IWL accuracy Figure 10: Learning curves under different noise levels 

B.4 Llama Based Synthetic Few-shot Classification 

Datasets construction. We saved the token embedding matrices of the Llama-3.2-1B, Llama-3.2-3B, and Llama-3.1-8B models. Each embedding matrix has a shape of 128 ,256 × dmodel , where dmodel = 2048 , 3072 ,and 4096 for the 1B, 3B, and 8B models, respectively. To construct “classes” for our few-shot classification experiments from these raw token embeddings, we apply the following three processing steps: 1. Subselection: Among the 128,256 tokens, many correspond to special symbols or non-English text. We selected all tokens consisting solely of English letters A-Z, a-z and underscores, resulting in 33,588 tokens. 2. Clustering: We applied spherical clustering using FAISS, performing 2,400-way clustering and re-taining all clusters containing more than 10 tokens. From these, we randomly selected 1,200 clusters. 3. Cluster Sampling: Many clusters contained more than 10 tokens. To maximize intra-class variability, we selected the 10 tokens farthest from each cluster center. Consequently, we obtained 1,200 classes, each containing 10 samples. Compared with Omniglot images, this construction produces classes with greater intra-class variability while reflecting semantic relations more relevant to NLP tasks. Some sample clusters from Llama-3.2-3B are shown below: 27 Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (02/2026) English | edish | apanese | French | Chinese | orean | California | Russian | frican | ustralian Class | _class | addClass | _CLASS | className | removeClass | classList | Classifier | hasClass | getClass ellow | green | Green | iolet | orange | urple | agenta | purple | Pink | greens | _YELLOW 

Implementation details. We trained both the Transformer and CoQE models on the constructed dataset following the same procedure described in the main text, fixing the data distribution parameters to Pbursty =0.9 and Zipfian exponent α = 1 to approximate the natural language distribution. In terms of model architecture, for both Transformer and CoQE, we used a three-layer MLP instead of a ResNet as the sample encoder, with hidden dimensions of 512, 256, and 64, respectively. The Transformer consists of 12 layers, while the task encoder in CoQE contains 4 layers, resulting in fewer parameters for CoQE compared with the Transformer. All other training hyperparameters such as learning rate and batch size, are set identical to those used in the image few-shot classification experiments. 28