Title: Joint Surrogate Learning of Objectives, Constraints, and Sensitivities for Efficient Multi-objective Optimization of Neural Dynamical Systems

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.20984v1

Published Time: Tue, 24 Mar 2026 01:12:00 GMT

Number of Pages: 31

Markdown Content:
# Joint Surrogate Learning of Objectives, Constraints, and Sensitivities for Efficient Multi-objective Optimization of Neural Dynamical Systems 

## Frithjof Gressmann 1,6 , Ivan Georgiev Raikov 2, Seung Hyun Kim 3,6 , Mattia Gazzola 3,4,5,6 ,Lawrence Rauchwerger 1,6 , and Ivan Soltesz 2

> 1

Siebel School of Computing and Data Science, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, 2Department of Neurosurgery, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 3Carl R. Woese Institute for Genomic Biology, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, 4Mechanical Science and Engineering, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, 5National Center for Supercomputing Applications, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, 6The Grainer College of Engineering, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 

## ABSTRACT 

Biophysical neural system simulations are among the most computationally demanding scientific applications, and their optimization requires navigating high-dimensional parameter spaces under numerous constraints that impose a binary feasible/infeasible partition with no gradient signal to guide the search. Here, we introduce DMOSOPT , a scalable optimization framework that leverages a unified, jointly learned surrogate model to capture the interplay between objectives, constraints, and parameter sensitivities. By learning a smooth approximation of both the objective landscape and the feasibility boundary, the joint surrogate provides a unified gradient that simultaneously steers the search toward improved objective values and greater constraint satisfaction, while its partial derivatives yield per-parameter sensitivity estimates that enable more targeted exploration. We validate the framework from single-cell dynamics to population-level network activity, spanning incremental stages of a neural circuit modeling workflow, and demonstrate efficient, effective optimization of highly constrained problems at supercomputing scale with substantially fewer problem evaluations. While motivated by and demonstrated in the context of computational neuroscience, the framework is general and applicable to constrained multi-objective optimization problems across scientific and engineering domains. 

# 1 Introduction 

Computational models of neural circuits are governed by many biophysical parameters that cannot all be determined analyti-cally or experimentally, but must be inferred through data-driven optimization. 34,28,3,11 These simulations of chaotic and tightly coupled dynamics are routinely among the most computationally demanding scientific applications, challenging even the most so-phisticated optimization algorithms. 10,40 Moreover, experimen-talists often characterize acceptable network behavior through constraints (e.g. bounds on firing rates, oscillation frequencies, or synchrony measures) far more readily than through precise tar-get values, making constrained formulations especially natural for this domain. However, the resulting binary feasible/infea-sible partition of the parameter space disrupts information to guide search, and the combination of high dimensionality, expen-sive evaluations, and narrow feasibility regions renders standard optimization approaches challenging if not intractable. Surrogate-assisted optimization addresses the evaluation bot-tleneck by replacing the original problem with computationally inexpensive models during search, 23,22 and has been extended to multi-objective 24,41,7 and constrained 15,20 settings. Multi-output models have further been used to capture correlations between objectives and constraints, 38 and differentiable surrogates have been exploited to optimize acquisition functions in Bayesian optimization. 36,2,8 

In practice, however, these three core surrogate capabilities— objective prediction, constraint estimation, and sensitivity analysis—are still developed and deployed largely in isolation, forcing practitioners to rely on ad-hoc heuristics for combining surrogate information. 4 A principled unification that leverages the joint gradient of a shared surrogate as a search direction has not been explored. Here, we propose such a framework (Fig. 1). The key in-sight is that a jointly learned, differentiable surrogate model naturally resolves the integration challenge: its gradients pro-vide a smooth, unified signal that simultaneously steers toward improved objective values and greater constraint satisfaction, while enabling sensitivity-informed exploration. We implement this approach in DMOSOPT , a new open-source framework for 

Distributed Multi-Objective Surrogate-Assisted Opt imization designed for extreme-scale problems with out-of-the-box HPC scalability via MPI (Section 4; github.com/dmosopt). The sur-rogate gradient is supplied as an informed search direction to a multi-objective evolutionary algorithm (MOEA), whose popu-lation diversity, mutation, and recombination operators provide exploratory pressure complementary to the surrogate’s exploita-tion signal. To validate the framework across the stages of a realistic mod-eling workflow, we apply it to progressively more challenging neuroscience optimization problems, from individual neuron models 5,30,3 to a large-scale hippocampal network, 3 demonstrat-ing how joint learning and surrogate-model gradients (1) im-prove optimization compared to disjoint surrogates, (2) uncover feasible solutions in highly constrained problems, and (3) enable the optimization of large-scale network models with minimal evaluations. While motivated by computational neuroscience, our techniques are domain-agnostic and readily transferable to constrained multi-objective optimization problems across sci-ence and engineering. 

# 2 Results 

Our approach centers on establishing joint surrogate model 

f : Rn → Rq+k, differentiable by construction, that simultane-ously predicts q objective values y and k constraint outcomes c

1

> arXiv:2603.20984v1 [cs.LG] 22 Mar 2026

problem search space 

> in-vivo in-vitro

xn-1 xn

large-scale neural system 

> connectivity objective m

MPI Worker 

Running 

model sample 

behavior matching 

Regions of optimality 

AD EB C

experimental recording • constraints 

◦ experimental 

◦ bio-physical 

> Soma
> Dendrite

10k neurons 

80k neurons 

300k neurons (hrs) (mins) 

surrogate gradient evaluation distributed HPC 

> Model refinement

re-evaluation multi-objectives morphology preserving multi-compartment 

xn-1 xn

objective head 

regression 

constraint head 

classifier Shared model Feature Tokenizer Latent Vector ( ) Feed Forward Multi-Head Attention  

> Soma Dendrite

parameters 

sampling iterative refinement multi-scale modeling sampling/simulation biological system surrogate model optimization/evaluation queries model 

B CEDAFigure 1. Surrogate-assisted optimization for multi-scale neural modeling at supercomputing scale. Top: overview of the iterative pipeline connecting biological data acquisition (A) , parameter sampling and simulation (B) , surrogate modeling (C) , multi-scale neural simulation (D) , and optimization/evaluation     

> (E) .A, Experimental recordings are obtained from in vivo and in vitro preparations of biological systems. B, Reproducing these observations requires efficient exploration of a high-dimensional parameter space subject to multiple objectives (behavior matching) and constraints (experimental and biophysical). C, A transformer-based surrogate model maps parameter configurations to a shared latent representation and jointly predicts objectives (regression head) and constraint satisfaction (classification head), yielding a differentiable approximation of the search landscape. D, Multi-compartment neuron models with detailed ion-channel dynamics are assembled into morphology-preserving networks and evaluated in parallel on distributed high-performance computing infrastructure via MPI workers.
> E, The surrogate enables iterative model refinement by identifying regions of optimality across multiple objectives.

for a given parameter vector x. We leverage the gradient of f

gsopt = ∇x[ fy(x)

| {z } 

> Objective

+ ( fc(x) − 1)

| {z }

> Constraint feasibility

]x=¯xi (1) that guides toward feasible regions of lower objective value. In practice, the objective and constraint terms are substituted by statistical metrics: a hypervolume-based loss and binary focal cross-entropy, with norm-balanced gradients (Supplementary Section S.2). The partial derivatives ∂ f   

> ∂xj

yield parameter sensi-tivity estimates at no extra cost. We parameterize f as a deep neural network, which scales readily to large evaluation budgets and high-dimensional, multi-output settings in contrast to the Gaussian process surrogates. Rather than optimizing f directly, which risks convergence to regions where the model is confi-dently wrong, 22 we supply gsopt as an informed search direction to a multi-objective evolutionary algorithm (MOEA), whose pop-ulation diversity, mutation, and recombination operators provide the exploratory pressure that uncertainty quantification provides in Bayesian optimization. All algorithmic details are reported in the Methods Section 4. In the following, the capabilities of DMOSOPT are demon-strated on a suite of progressively more challenging neurosci-entific problems ranging from individual neuron dynamics to a full-scale hippocampal network simulation, establishing each component of the framework in turn. 

## 2.1 Neural network surrogates outperform base-lines on single-cell optimization 

We begin by considering the optimization of individual CA1 hippocampal interneuron models, each having a distinct electro-physiological fingerprint that must be faithfully reproduced as a prerequisite for assembling a realistic network model. Because individual single-cell simulations are computationally tractable even without surrogates, this problem class also provides a suit-able testbed for benchmarking surrogate approaches before scal-

2/31 ing to the full network. To this end, we jointly optimized 9 morphologically distinct CA1 hippocampal interneuron types using a two-compartment Pinsky-Rinzel neuron formalism 33,1 

implemented in the NEURON simulator 21 (Supplementary Sec-tion S.6.1). Each cell is comprised of a somatic compartment (fast Na + and delayed rectifier K+ currents) and a dendritic compartment (high-threshold Ca 2+, Ca 2+-activated K+, and afterhyperpolarization K+ currents), coupled by an adjustable soma-dendrite conductance. To ensure numerical stability under surrogate-guided optimization, we adopt the continuous reformu-lation of Atherton et al., 1 which replaces the discontinuous gat-ing functions of the original Pinsky-Rinzel model with smooth exponential and sinusoidal approximations while preserving its qualitative dynamics (Supplementary Section S.6.1). Each model has 10-15 biophysical parameters governing compartment geometry, ion channel conductances, and passive membrane properties, and is optimized against four electrophysiological objectives (input resistance, membrane time constant, frequency-current relationship, and spike amplitude) subject to 7-8 binary constraints encoding biophysical validity requirements such as monotonic frequency-current responses and absence of sponta-neous spiking. We first verified that surrogate-assisted search is necessary for this problem class. Standard space-filling sampling strate-gies (symmetric Latin hypercube, SLH; Latin hypercube, LH; Monte Carlo, MC; Sobol sequences) fail to approach the theoret-ical maximum normalized hypervolume even after thousands of evaluations, whereas Gaussian process regression (GPR)-based surrogate optimization consistently reaches it (Figure 2B). This confirms that the objective landscape is too complex for passive sampling and motivates the use of surrogates to guide the search. We then compared four neural network surrogate config-urations. ResNet and FT-Transformer 17 backbones, each in objective-only ( o-) and joint constraint-and-objective ( c+o-)variants are benchmarked against the GPR and Multi-Expert Gaussian Process (MEGP) baselines. All neural network sur-rogates achieved additive ε-indicator values well within the 2% acceptable-solution threshold, indicating that their Pareto fronts nearly dominate those of the no-surrogate baseline (Fig-ure 2C). This improvement is explained by systematically lower prediction error: the neural networks achieve lower normalized root-mean-square error (NRMSE) relative to the GP baselines throughout the optimization (Figure 2D). Importantly, this higher accuracy does not come at the cost of increased computation; the neural network surrogates incur comparable or lower inference times than the GP baselines, yielding a more favorable accuracy-to-compute trade-off (Figure 2E). Per-population breakdowns confirm that these trends hold across cell types with varying constraint difficulty (Supplementary Figures 6, 7). These results establish neural networks as a practical surrogate backbone for this problem class. Beyond their empirical advan-tages, neural networks are natively differentiable and straight-forward to extend with additional output heads, properties that we exploit in the following sections to build the joint modeling framework. 

## 2.2 Joint surrogate learning yields more effective optimization than disjoint models 

Having established the neural network surrogate backbone, we next investigated whether joint learning of objectives and con-straints affects optimization quality. We compared four neu-ral network configurations (objective-only and joint variants of ResNet and FT-Transformer) and two GP baselines across all 10 single-cell optimization problems. Figure 3A illustrates the core mechanism: the joint surrogate gradient, which combines partial derivatives with respect to both objectives and constraints, provides a corrected search direction that steers away from infeasible regions while simultaneously improving objective values. In practice, this translates to faster convergence. Normalized hypervolume curves for representative in vivo and in vitro cell types show that all surrogate-assisted strategies converge faster and with fewer evaluations than the full simulation alone, with the joint c+o variants reaching equiv-alent or superior hypervolume in fewer epochs. At epoch 25, surrogate-assisted methods achieve normalized inverted genera-tional distance (IGD) values of ≤ 0.48% (in vivo) and ≤ 0.04% (in vitro) relative to the full-simulation Pareto front, confirming that surrogate-guided search closely approximates the true opti-mum. Per-population convergence curves for all 9 interneuron types are provided in Supplementary Figure 8. To obtain a global ranking across cell types, we aggregated performance on two complementary metrics (Figure 3B). For final solution quality (IGD), the joint c+o -FT-Transformer achieved the best mean rank across populations, demonstrat-ing that shared learning of objectives and constraints produces better Pareto fronts. For convergence speed (hypervolume area under the curve, HV-AUC), the objective-only ( o-) architectures converged fastest, revealing a trade-off between early conver-gence and final solution quality. This trade-off is expected: the joint model must also learn the constraint landscape, slightly slowing early convergence but ultimately producing solutions that are both more feasible and of higher quality. Across both metrics, the FT-Transformer backbone consistently outranked the GP baselines. The jointly trained differentiable surrogate provides an addi-tional benefit: its partial derivatives ∂ f   

> ∂xj

yield per-parameter sen-sitivity estimates at no extra computational cost. We compared these surrogate-gradient-derived sensitivity indices ( sgrad )against two established methods, namely the Fourier Ampli-tude Sensitivity Test (FAST) 29 and the Derivative-based Global Sensitivity Measure (DGSM), 37 when used to inform the NSGA-II distribution indices that control crossover and mutation spread. Across representative cell populations, surrogate-gradient sensi-tivity yielded IGD and normalized hypervolume comparable to FAST and DGSM (Figure 3C; Supplementary Figure 10), while being a direct by-product of the surrogate model and requiring no additional simulation budget. This result demonstrates that joint learning not only improves objective and constraint pre-diction but also furnishes actionable sensitivity information that further focuses the search on the most influential parameters. 

> 3/31

max volume (1.4641) parameters Joint optimization 4 objectives temporal objectives sampling baseline 10 diverse cell types 15 parameters 7 constraints random search surrogate optimization (GPR) Normalized Hypervolume 1.44 1.32 0.0 0.1 0.2 1.36 1.40 Sampling strategy SLH LH MC SOBOL higher, better objective #1 out of 4 optimized un-optimized Injected current (nA) Time (ms) 500 1500 Soma voltage (mV) 50 25 -25 -50 -75 0

> ROBUST OPTIMIZATION
> Absolute error (NRMSE)

## Eequal solution prediction error prediction speed 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 c+o-fttransformer o-fttransformer c+o-resnet o-resnet megp baseline ours 

> c+o-fttransformer c+o-resnet megp

baseline ours 

> Inference time (s)

02468

Epsilon Indicator (%) baseline  ours 

> acceptable solution

c+o-fttransformer o-fttransformer c+o-resnet o-resnet megp gpr 1.06 1.08 1.23 1.16 1.58 1.57 0 2     

> EFFICIENT MODELLING Figure 2. Neural network surrogate performance on single-cell optimization. A , To benchmark surrogate performance across diverse dynamical systems, 9 morphologically distinct CA1 interneuron types are jointly optimized over 10-15 parameters against 4 electrophysiological objectives (e.g., somatic firing response to current injection, objective #1 shown) subject to 7-8 constraints. Solid and dashed traces show optimized and un-optimized voltage responses, respectively.
> B, Standard space-filling sampling strategies (symmetric Latin hypercube, SLH; Latin hypercube, LH; Monte Carlo, MC; Sobol sequences) fail to approach the theoretical maximum normalized hypervolume, whereas Gaussian process regression (GPR)-based surrogate optimization consistently reaches it. C, All tested neural network surrogates (ResNet and FTTransformer variants with objective-only “o-” or joint constraint-and-objective “c+o”-heads) achieve Pareto-front ε-indicator values well within the 2% acceptable-solution threshold and outperform GPR and multi-output Gaussian Process (MEGP) baselines. D, This improvement is explained by lower absolute prediction error (normalized root-mean-square error, NRMSE) of the neural network architectures relative to the GP baselines throughout the optimization. E, ResNet variants achieve higher accuracy at lower inference cost than the GP baselines; the FTTransformer incurs moderately higher inference times but delivers the largest accuracy gains. Since accuracy gains translate to faster convergence, reduced evaluations relative to GPs outweigh any increase in inference overhead across all configurations.

## 2.3 Surrogate constraint gradients guide opti-mization toward feasible regions in highly constrained problems 

The preceding single-cell benchmarks benefit from parameter ranges that have been narrowed by domain expertise, yielding moderate constraints that random sampling can partially satisfy. In practice, however, such expert-curated ranges are often un-available: modelers begin with broad, naively specified bounds that encompass the full biophysical range of each parameter and must rely on the optimizer to locate the feasible subspace. To evaluate such a scenario, we optimized a spinal motoneuron model 5 under both search-space configurations: the narrow, bi-ologically informed range (presented as the representative in vitro cell type in Figure 4) and a deliberately widened range with uninformed parameter bounds (Supplementary Section S.6.6). Characterizing constraint feasibility via Monte Carlo sam-pling reveals the severity of the wide-range problem (Figure 4A, left). While four of the seven constraints are satisfied at apprecia-ble rates, three constraints yield exactly 0% feasibility. Because joint satisfaction of all constraints is required, random sampling fails to discover even a single valid solution, rendering standard optimization ineffective. This combinatorial infeasibility is not an artifact of undersampling, as the three zero-feasibility con-straints impose narrow manifolds in parameter space that cannot be located without directed search (Supplementary Figure 11). Computing the surrogate gradient with respect to the con-straint classification head ( ∇x fc) provides exactly the directed signal needed to overcome this barrier. By appending gradient-descent steps on the frozen surrogate to the evolutionary search, the optimizer is actively steered into feasible parameter regions. Constraint-gradient-augmented strategies achieve rapid conver-gence in normalized hypervolume, substantially outperforming both standard surrogate methods and the full-simulation base-line over 25 optimization epochs (Figure 4A, right). In contrast, random sampling (dashed black line) fails to make meaningful progress, confirming that the smooth gradient signal from the surrogate is essential for navigating the discontinuous feasibility landscape. To verify that the surrogate gradient provides a reliable ap-

4/31 ours baseline max volume 10normalized normalized <0.48% methods methods distance (norm. IGD) 10distance (norm. IGD) <0.04% faster convergence via joint modeling both architecture and joint-learning matters sensitivity via surrogate gradient Quality of solution Convergence speed Norm. HV IGD Method Method full simulation full simulation 

> with surrogate
> with surrogate
> (at 25 epoch)

Epoch Epoch Evaluations Evaluations Normalized hypervolume (at 25 epoch) ours ours ours ours 1500 4000 0 25 0 25 1.40 1.42 1.44 1.46 

in vivo in vitro 

1100 3600 

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 0 2 4 6 8lower, better 

IGD HV-AUC 

lower, better c+o-fttransformer 

> fttransformer (mean)
> o-fttransformer
> o-resnet
> c+o (mean)
> o (mean)
> resnet (mean)
> c+o-resnet
> megp
> gpr
> c+o-fttransformer
> fttransformer (mean)
> o-fttransformer
> o-resnet
> c+o (mean)
> o (mean)
> resnet (mean)
> c+o-resnet
> megp
> gpr

80 100 120 140 160 lower, better higher, better fast dgsm sgrad (ours) 

1.40 1.42 1.44 full simulation (no surrogate) megp gpr o-fttransformer c+o-fttransformer c+o-resnet o-resnet 

correction correction by constraint gradient 

objective objective gradient may leads to infeasible solution minimum (target) 

> JOINT SURROGATE MODEL CONVERGENCE INSIGHT

Figure 3. Joint differentiable representation of objectives, constraints and sensitivities. A , Left: schematic illustration how the joint surrogate gradient -combining objective and constraint partial derivatives - corrects the search direction away from infeasible regions toward optimal solutions. Right: normalized hypervolume over optimization epochs for representative in vivo and in vitro cell types. All surrogate-assisted strategies (neural network and GP baselines) converge faster and with fewer evaluations than full simulation alone (dashed line). Insets show normalized Inverted Generational Distance (IGD) to full-simulation solution at epoch 25; surrogate-assisted methods achieve ≤ 0.48% (in vivo) and ≤ 0.04% (in vitro) deviation from the full-simulation Pareto front. B, Global ranking of surrogate strategies across all single-cell problems (lower is better). Left: joint constraint-and-objective learning (c+o) on an FTTransformer backbone achieves the highest solution quality (IGD). Right: objective-only architectures (o-) converge fastest (hypervolume area under the curve, HV-AUC), revealing a trade-off between convergence speed and final solution quality. The FTTransformer backbone consistently outranks the GP baselines on both metrics. C, Surrogate-gradient-based sensitivity analysis (sgrad) yields IGD and normalized hypervolume comparable to established methods (Fourier Amplitude Sensitivity Test, FAST; Derivative-based Global Sensitivity Measure, DGSM) while being a direct by-product of the surrogate model, requiring no additional simulation budget. 

proximation of the true objective landscape, we analyzed the gradient-descent trajectory in detail (Figure 4B, left). Surrogate-predicted objective values (blue) were evaluated in parallel on the full NEURON simulation (green), confirming close agree-ment along the descent path. Occasional divergence, particularly near parameter configurations that produce non-viable simula-tions, highlights the importance of periodically re-anchoring the surrogate to true evaluations. The full multi-objective gradient-descent traces for all four objectives are provided in Supplemen-tary Figure 13. We further investigated whether the gradient-descent trajec-tory could serve as an informative source of training data for bootstrapping the surrogate. Along the descent path, trace sam-ples were selected by maximizing predicted diversity across all objectives via iterative distance filtering (Section S.2). Augment-ing the initial training set with just 10 trace samples substantially reduced Pareto-front prediction error (NRMSE) compared with either the initial sampling alone or augmentation with 10 addi-tional random samples (Figure 4B, right). This demonstrates that gradient-guided trajectories traverse informative regions of the search space and can meaningfully accelerate surrogate training at minimal evaluation cost. 

## 2.4 Joint surrogate optimization enables multi-fidelity large-scale network simulation with minimal evaluations 

Following the single-cell benchmarks, we applied our frame-work to a full-scale biophysical simulation of the hippocampal CA1 circuit, 3,39 a problem that is out of reach for non-surrogate optimization. The full-scale network model comprises 836 ,970 neurons across 15 cell populations connected by almost 1 billion synaptic projections (Supplementary Section S.6.7), spanning from brain-volume connectivity down to single-cell ion-channel dynamics (Figure 5A). Because multiple evaluations of the complete network within an iterative surrogate optimization loop is computationally in-tractable, we employed a multi-fidelity strategy in which op-

5/31 random sampling Epoch Evaluations 0 25 1100 3600 

surrogate gradient guides to feasible solution 

surrogate matches full gradient 

computationally efficient surrogate yields true progress 

constraint 

random sampling (monte-carlo) 

> MOTONEURON SPACE SEARCH TRAJECTORY
> max volume
> baseline  ours

full simulation random sampling c+o-fttransformer o-fttransformer c+o-resnet o-resnet megp gpr 

-fttransformer-c+o -resnet-c Normalized hypervolume 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 highly constrained problems where random sampling fails surrogate gradient vs true optimization pareto-front prediction error Objective Surrogate gradient steps true surrogate trace samples 02k 0 100 200 300 400 500 Prediction error (NRMSE) 0.2 0.0 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 initial sampling initial+ 10 random initial+ 10 trace 

narrow feasibility ... evaluated samples constraint feasibility rate (%) pre-spike count resistance range initial voltage tau range first ISI ISI adaptation monot. F-I no solution 

Constraints Figure 4. Solving highly constrained problems with constraint-surrogate gradients. A , Left: characterization of constraint feasibility for a motoneuron optimization problem via random (Monte Carlo) sampling. While four of seven constraints are satisfied at appreciable rates (pre-spike count, 99.9%; resistance range, 94.8%; initial voltage, 94.8%; tau range, 40.8%), three constraints - first inter-spike interval (ISI), ISI adaptation, and monotonic frequency-current (F-I) relationship - yield 0% feasibility, preventing random sampling from discovering any valid solution. Right: computing the surrogate gradient with respect to the constraint classification head ( ∇x fc)) guides the optimizer into feasible regions. Constraint-gradient-augmented strategies achieve rapid convergence in normalized hypervolume, substantially outperforming both standard surrogate methods and the full-simulation baseline over 25 epochs. Random sampling (dashed black) fails to make meaningful progress. B, Left: analysis of the surrogate gradient-descent trajectory (blue) alongside its evaluation on the full simulation (green), confirming that the surrogate approximates the true objective landscape. Trace samples (orange dashed) are selected along the descent path by maximizing predicted diversity across all objectives. Right: augmenting the initial sampling set with 10 surrogate-descent trace samples substantially reduces Pareto-front prediction error (NRMSE) compared with the initial sampling alone or augmentation with 10 additional random samples, demonstrating the informativeness of gradient-guided trajectories for bootstrapping surrogate training. 

timization is performed on a network slice of approximately 8,700 neurons extracted from the full-scale network (Supple-mentary Section S.6.7). This computational strategy mirrors the use of acute hippocampal slice preparations in experimen-tal neuroscience, where a spatially restricted section of tissue preserves local circuit connectivity and cellular physiology suf-ficiently to characterize network dynamics, with results that in-form understanding of the intact circuit. The slice preserves the full complement of cell populations, projection pathway types, and single-cell biophysical detail of the full model, allowing surrogate-guided search at manageable cost. Synaptic weight parameters optimized at slice scale are subsequently transferred to the full-scale model for validation. Each simulation evaluation of the slice requires ∼42 .3 s on 300 CPU cores ( ∼5.4 TACC Frontera supercomputer nodes), and the optimization targets (per-population firing rates and fractions of active cells) make for a high-dimensional objective space that is challenging to scale with GP-based surrogates. Due to the extreme computational cost ( ∼60 – 300 CPU-days per run), the network optimization was run only once per surrogate method. The total computational cost, measured in both CPU-days and wall-clock hours, reveals significant efficiency gains for the joint surrogate approach (Figure 5B). The c+o -FT-Transformer reached solutions of comparable quality to the MEGP baseline with 2× less total compute and to the GPR baseline with 5× less compute, with surrogate training and inference overhead being negligible relative to simulation time. Normalized hypervolume convergence over 50 optimization epochs shows that the c+o -FT-Transformer and MEGP exhibit similar initial convergence rates, both dominating the GPR base-line (Figure 5C). After approximately 20 epochs, however, the joint transformer advances to markedly higher hypervolume, sav-ing 54% of epochs relative to MEGP and 80% relative to GPR to reach equivalent solution quality. This late-stage acceleration reflects the increasing accuracy of the neural network surrogate as it accumulates more training data, a regime where GP-based methods, whose computational cost scales super-linearly with sample size, become increasingly uncompetitive. The optimized network produces biologically realistic dynam-ics: instantaneous population firing rates for oriens-lacunosum moleculare (OLM) interneurons (dendritic inhibition) and pyra-

6/31 midal (PYR) cells (principal output) are brought into their re-spective experimentally determined target ranges, yielding bal-anced excitatory-inhibitory network activity (Figure 5C-I). Quan-tifying firing-rate deviation from target across four functional cell classes confirms that the c+o -FT-Transformer consistently achieves smaller deviations than both GP baselines, producing network dynamics that more closely match the biological target across all cell types (Figure 5C-II). These results demonstrate that the combined framework of joint surrogate learning, constraint-gradient-guided search, and sensitivity-informed sampling translates the efficiency gains ob-served on single-cell benchmarks to extreme-scale network mod-els, reducing the computational burden of large-scale neural circuit optimization from hundreds to tens of CPU-days. 

# 3 Discussion 

The central finding of this work is that jointly learning objectives and constraints in a shared differentiable model yields quali-tatively different optimization behavior than treating them in isolation. The mechanism is structural: in biophysical neuron models, the same ion channel conductances that govern firing-rate objectives also determine whether physiological constraints such as monotonic frequency-current relationships are satisfied. A joint model captures these shared dependencies in its latent representation, producing more accurate predictions precisely in the constraint-relevant regions of the search space. This ad-vantage is most pronounced when feasibility occupies a thin manifold and the smooth surrogate gradient can provide direc-tional information that the raw binary constraint partition cannot. At scale, the neural network parameterization proves essential. The O(n3) cost of Gaussian process surrogates restricts their use to modest evaluation budgets, 26 whereas the network opti-mization problem, with its high-dimensional objective space and thousands of accumulated training samples, requires a surrogate that scales gracefully with both data and output dimensionality. The accompanying trade-off, the loss of calibrated uncertainty estimates, is partially compensated by the intrinsic exploration of the multi-objective evolutionary algorithm through popula-tion diversity, mutation, and recombination (in this work con-cretely implemented by NSGA-II-type optimizers 9). Although our benchmarks are drawn from computational neuroscience, the framework requires only a black-box objective function with optional binary constraints. The same approach could serve constrained optimization problems in engineering design, where aerodynamic or structural objectives must satisfy manufactur-ing and safety constraints over high-dimensional shape param-eterizations, 12,25 molecular and drug design, where candidate molecules must satisfy pharmacokinetic and synthesizability constraints, 16,18 or materials discovery, where compositions and processing conditions span high-dimensional spaces subject to stability and performance bounds. 27 

Several limitations and corresponding future directions merit discussion. The surrogate may overfit to early training data, directing the search toward spurious optima (Supplementary Section S.9.4); we mitigate this via cross-validated epoch se-lection, periodic retraining, and elite preservation in the evo-lutionary population (Algorithm 1), but more principled trust-region strategies could further improve robustness. The smooth approximation of the constraint landscape, while essential for gradient computation, may oversmooth sharp feasibility bound-aries; adaptive smoothing or constraint-specific heads could help. Hypervolume computation scales exponentially with the number of objectives, limiting applicability for many simultaneous ob-jectives. Looking ahead, integrating uncertainty quantification through evidential deep learning 35 or deep ensembles 13 could combine the scalability of neural networks with the principled exploration of Bayesian optimization. Pre-training surrogates on libraries of related problems, warm-starting from partially differentiable simulators, and extending to a high number of objectives settings are natural next steps. In summary, by jointly capturing objectives, constraints, and sensitivities in a single differentiable model, the framework lets practitioners specify what they know in terms of constraints on acceptable behavior rather than exact target values for op-timization to handle the rest, shifting the burden from manual parameter tuning to principled, scalable, automated search. 

# 4 Methods 

## 4.1 Problem formulation 

We consider a black-box constrained multi-objective optimiza-tion problem of the form min  

> x∈X

y(x) =  y1(x), . . . , yq(x),

s.t. c j(x) ∈ { 0, 1}, j = 1, . . . , k,

xlb ≤ x ≤ xub , (2) where x ∈ Rn is the parameter vector, X = [ xlb , xub ] is the bounded search space, y : Rn → Rq are q objective functions to be minimized, and c1, . . . , ck are k binary constraint functions, where c j(x) = 1 indicates feasibility and c j(x) = 0 indicates infeasibility. Each evaluation of y and c requires an expensive simulation (e.g., a biophysical neuron model solved by a nu-merical integrator), and no analytical gradients are available. A parameter vector is considered feasible if and only if all con-straints are simultaneously satisfied: ∏kj=1 c j(x) = 1. Using as few simulation evaluations as possible, the goal is to approximate the constrained Pareto front, i.e. the set of feasible solutions for which no other feasible solution improves one objective without worsening another. 

## 4.2 Joint surrogate model 

The core of the framework is a joint surrogate model f : Rn →

Rq+k that simultaneously predicts objective values ˆy = fy(x) ∈

Rq and constraint satisfaction probabilities ˆc = fc(x) ∈ [0, 1]k

from a shared learned representation. We parameterize f as a deep neural network with a shared backbone and two task-specific output heads: a regression head for objectives (linear 

> 7/31

A B

> volume connectivity morphology

full-scale, high fidelity simulation detailed CA1 model             

> computational scale bio-physical scale
> SCALING UP
> target micro circuitry 0100 200 300 400 500 600 700 Compute time (CPU-days)
> 010 20 30 40 50 Wall-clock time using 300 cores per worker (hours)

GPR to reach comparable solution 

ours 

MEGP to reach comparable solution 

ours  

> problem evals surrogate training + inference
> (2x compute saved) (5x compute saved)

C C-I C-II 

megp gpr tuned firing behavior normalized hypervolume progress deviation from target 

> OPTIMIZATION PROGRESS

Epoch Time (ms) 30 10 0 20 40 50 Norm. Hypervolume higher, optimized 1.07 1.09 1.11 1.13 1.15 dynamics changing ( C-I )

c+o fttransformer (ours) 

> megp gpr c+o fttransformer (ours)
> (80% epoch saved) (54% epoch saved)

Firing Rate Deviation (Hz) 

-20 0 20 40 principal output somatic inhibition dendritic inhibition fast dendritic inhibition dendritic 

> inhibition
> principal
> output
> PYR Firing Rate (Hz)

0.0 0.3 activity balanced target target before after 030 60 OLM Firing Rate (Hz) 2000 8000 5000 Figure 5. Joint-surrogate optimization of large-scale network problems A , The multi-scale CA1 hippocampal network optimization problem spans biophysical scales (brain volume → connectivity → cell morphology) to computational scales (detailed micro-circuitry simulations), requiring high-fidelity, full-scale simulation. 

B, Total compute cost, measured in CPU-days (top axis) and wall-clock hours on 300 cores per worker (bottom axis), broken down into problem evaluations (solid bars) and surrogate training plus inference (hatched bars). The joint c+o-FTTransformer reaches solutions comparable to the MEGP baseline with 2x less compute and to the GPR baseline with 5x less compute. C, Normalized hypervolume over 50 optimization epochs. The c+o-FTTransformer (ours) and MEGP show similar initial convergence rates, both dominating the GPR baseline; after approximately 20 epochs the joint transformer advances to higher hypervolume, saving 54% of epochs relative to MEGP and 80% relative to GPR to reach equivalent solution quality. C-I Instantaneous population firing rates before (dashed) and after (solid) optimization for oriens-lacunosum moleculare (OLM) interneurons (dendritic inhibition, left axis) and pyramidal (PYR) cells (principal output, right axis). Optimization brings both populations into their respective target ranges (shaded bands), yielding balanced network activity. C-II Firing-rate deviation from target (0 = ideal) across four functional cell classes (principal output, somatic inhibition, dendritic inhibition, fast dendritic inhibition). The joint c+o-FTTransformer consistently achieves smaller deviations than the MEGP and GPR baselines, producing network dynamics closer to the biological target. 

activation) and a classification head for constraints (sigmoid ac-tivation). We evaluated two backbone architectures from the tab-ular deep learning literature: 17 a ResNet with batch-normalized residual blocks, and a FT-Transformer that processes learned token embeddings via multi-head self-attention. The model is trained with Adam ( η = 0.001 , batch size 2048) on an un-weighted sum of mean squared error (objectives) and binary cross-entropy (constraints). The number of training epochs is selected via 3-fold cross-validation; note that early stopping monitors validation loss but does not restore best-epoch weights, relying instead on epoch averaging to avoid overfitting to a single fold. Full architecture specifications, hyperparameters, normal-ization procedures, and adaptive scaling rules are provided in supplementary section S.1. 

## 4.3 Gradient-based feasibility solving 

The differentiability of the joint surrogate enables gradient-based steering of candidate solutions toward feasible, high-performing regions of the search space. Given a batch of candidate param-eters X and the frozen trained surrogate, we perform iterative gradient descent on X with respect to a composite loss that combines objective minimization (hypervolume maximization) and constraint feasibility (binary focal cross-entropy) terms, op-tionally augmented by an exploration loss and a non-negativity penalty. When multiple terms are active, their gradients are 

L2-norm-balanced to the first term. This procedure augments, rather than replaces, the evolutionary optimizer: in each epoch, the NSGA-II 9 population is partitioned so that the elite half is preserved while the remaining candidates are refined via gradient descent before evaluation on the true simulator (Algorithm 1). Full loss definitions, optimizer settings, and convergence criteria are provided in supplementary section S.2. 

## 4.4 Sensitivity-informed sampling 

The partial derivatives of the trained surrogate provide a compu-tationally free estimate of parameter sensitivity. Per-parameter elasticities S(k) 

> j

= ∂ ˆyk   

> ∂xj

· x j, averaged in absolute value across train-ing samples, are mapped to NSGA-II distribution indices so that sensitive parameters undergo smaller perturbations while insensi-tive ones are explored more broadly. This requires only forward and backward passes over the training data with no additional simulation evaluations, in contrast to FAST or DGSM which re-quire dedicated sampling designs (Supplementary Section S.3). 

8/31 4.5 Optimization loop 

The complete optimization follows an iterative surrogate-assisted loop (Algorithm 2; Supplementary Section S.4). An initial set of parameter vectors (100 for single-cell, problem-specific for network) is drawn via symmetric Latin hypercube sampling and evaluated on the true simulator. In each subsequent epoch: (1) the surrogate is retrained on all accumulated data, (2) sensi-tivity indices are optionally computed, (3) NSGA-II generates candidate solutions using the surrogate as a fast proxy for the true objective function; all generations within an epoch operate entirely on surrogate predictions, with only the final candidate set evaluated on the true simulator, (4) candidates are optionally refined via gradient-based feasibility solving, and (5) results are appended to the training set. The loop terminates after a fixed epoch budget (25 for single-cell, 50 for network) or upon a convergence criterion. If fewer than 3 unique constraint pat-terns are observed, the surrogate falls back from joint ( c+o ) to objective-only ( o) mode to avoid degenerate classification. 

## 4.6 Gaussian process baselines 

Two Gaussian process (GP) surrogates serve as baselines. Gaus-sian Process Regression (GPR) uses a Mat ´ern 5/2 kernel with hy-perparameters optimized by marginal likelihood maximization via the Adam optimizer, implemented in GPyTorch. 14 Multi-Expert Gaussian Process (MEGP) extends GPR to multi-output settings by fitting independent GP experts per objective. Because the GP surrogates model objectives only and have no mechanism for learning the constraint boundary, they are trained exclusively on feasible samples (i.e., those satisfying all constraints), with duplicates removed before fitting; including infeasible samples would introduce objective values from regions where the simula-tion may not produce physically meaningful results, distorting the surrogate’s approximation of the feasible-region objective surface. The neural network surrogates, by contrast, learn objec-tives and constraints jointly and therefore benefit from training on all available data, including infeasible samples. 

## 4.7 Software framework 

The framework is implemented in DMOSOPT , an open-source Python package following a controller-worker architecture com-municating via MPI. The controller manages the optimization state and surrogate; workers execute simulations and return results. The framework supports interchangeable optimizers (NSGA-II, AGE-MOEA, 32 SMPSO, 31 CMA-ES 19 ), surrogates (GPR, MEGP, ResNet, FT-Transformer, and custom models via a plugin interface), samplers, and sensitivity methods. A full specification is provided in Supplementary Section S.5. 

## 4.8 Benchmark problems 

We evaluated the framework on three benchmark problems of increasing complexity, each representing a stage in a neural circuit modeling workflow. 

CA1 hippocampal interneuron single-cell models. Nine mor-phologically distinct CA1 interneuron types (SCA, IVY, PVBC, CCKBC, AAC, BS, OLM, NGFC, IS) were optimized using two-compartment Pinsky–Rinzel models 33 in the NEURON sim-ulator. 21 Each model has 10-15 parameters (compartment ge-ometry, coupling and ion channel conductances, calcium dy-namics), 4 objectives (input resistance, membrane time constant, f–I curve, and spike amplitude errors computed as squared dis-tance to experimentally determined target ranges), and 7-8 bi-nary constraints (monotonic f-I, resistance and time constant ranges, spike detection, ISI properties, absence of spontaneous spiking, and initial voltage accuracy). Optimization ran for 25 epochs with 100 evaluations per epoch (population size 100, 10 NSGA-II generations per epoch, 100 initial samples via sym-metric Latin hypercube sampling). Full parameter specifications and electrophysiological targets are provided in Supplementary Section S.6.1. 

Motoneuron model. A two-compartment motoneuron model with 11 parameters (coupling, somatic Na +/K +/KCa/CaN, den-dritic CaL/CaN/KCa, leak conductances, capacitance ratio) 5 was optimized against the same 4 types of objectives and 7 types of constraints as the CA1 interneuron models. Objective targets were based on experimental characterizations of spinal motoneu-ron cultures. 30 Two search-space configurations were used: a narrow, biologically informed range (baseline) and a deliberately widened range in which 3 of 7 constraints yield 0% feasibility under random sampling, serving as a test of gradient-based fea-sibility solving. Optimization ran for 25 epochs (Supplementary Section S.6.6). 

CA1 hippocampal network model. A full-scale biophysical simulation of the CA1 microcircuit 3 implemented in the MiV-Simulator 39 with 836 ,970 neurons across 15 populations and over 10 billion synaptic projections. Large numbers of evalua-tions of the full-scale model within the surrogate optimization loop are infeasible on the HPC hardware allocation available to us. Optimization was therefore performed on a subset (“slice”) of the network comprising approximately 8,700 neurons distributed across all 15 cell populations, with per-population counts listed in table 7 and approximately 265 million connections. The opti-mization adjusts n = 142 synaptic weight parameters across all projection pathways and comprises 36 objectives (per-population firing rate, mean fraction of active cells, and standard deviation of the fraction of active cells across 12 target populations) and 12 constraints (positive firing rates). Each evaluation required 

∼42 .3 s on 300 CPU cores on the Frontera supercomputer (Texas Advanced Computing Center). Optimization ran for 50 epochs with population size 100 and 10 NSGA-II generations per epoch (Supplementary Section S.6.7). 

Metrics. Solution quality was assessed via normalized hy-pervolume (HV), hypervolume area under the curve (HV-AUC), inverted generational distance (IGD), and the additive 

ε-indicator; surrogate accuracy via normalized root-mean-square error (NRMSE). All metrics are defined in Supplementary Sec-

> 9/31

tion S.7. Single-cell and motoneuron experiments were repli-cated 3-5 times with independent random seeds; the network problem was run once per method due to computational cost (Supplementary Section S.8). 

Computational resources. All experiments were executed on the Frontera supercomputer at the Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC). Single-cell and motoneuron optimizations each required <1 CPU-day. The network optimization required ∼60 -300 CPU-days per surrogate method ( 5,000 evaluations × ∼ 42 s 

× 300 cores). The total computational budget across all exper-iments, including all replicates, surrogates, and baselines, was approximately 1,500 CPU-days. 

## 4.9 Data availability 

All electrophysiological targets used in this study are derived from previously published experimental data, cited in the respec-tive benchmark descriptions. The aggregate numerical experi-ment data required to reproduce all figures are publicly available via the code repository (see Code availability). Raw optimization data comprising all evaluated parameter vectors, objective values, and constraint outcomes are available from the corresponding authors upon reasonable request. 

## 4.10 Code availability 

All code to reproduce the presented experiments is pub-licly available from GitHub repositories. DMOSOPT can be installed via pip and its source code, including doc-umentation with tutorials and examples, is available at github.com/dmosopt. The notebooks to reproduce the experiments and figures in this paper can be found at github.com/GazzolaLab/MultiObjectiveSurrogateOptimization 

## Acknowledgements 

The work was funded by NSF Expedition “Mind in Vitro” award #IIS-2123781. The authors wish to thank Prannath Moolchand and Darian Hadjiabadi for discussions and work on early ver-sions of the electrophysiological objective functions for neuron model optimization and connectivity structure of the CA1 net-work model. 

# Appendix 

# Supplementary Materials 

## S.1 Surrogate Model Architectures and Training Procedure 

This section provides the full specification of the neural network surrogate models used throughout the paper. Both architectures share a common base that handles input/output normalization, loss computation, automatic epoch selection, and joint output heads for objectives and constraints. 

S.1.1 FT-Transformer 

The FT-Transformer 17 adapts the Feature Tokenizer Transformer architecture for tabular regression and classification. Each input parameter is projected into a learned token embedding, and a learnable CLS (classification) token is prepended. The token se-quence is processed by a stack of pre-norm Transformer blocks, and the CLS token representation is used for prediction. 

Embedding layer. A dense layer projects the n-dimensional input x ∈ Rn into n token embeddings of dimension d:

E = Reshape n×d (Wex + be) , We ∈ R(n·d)×n, (3) where weights and biases are initialized uniformly in 

[−d−1/2, d−1/2].

Transformer blocks. Each of the L blocks follows a pre-norm residual architecture: 

h = E + Dropout pr (MHA (LN (E))) , (4) 

E′ = h + Dropout pr (FFN (LN (h))) , (5) where LN denotes layer normalization, MHA is multi-head at-tention with H heads and key dimension dk = max (8, d/H), and the feed-forward network is FFN (z) = Dropout p f (W2 GELU (W1z + b1) + b2) , (6) with hidden dimension dff = ⌊rff · d⌋. The final block extracts the CLS token: zout = E′

> 0

.

Output heads. After a final layer normalization, the CLS representation is fed to task-specific linear heads: • Objectives: ˆy = Wozout + bo ∈ Rq (linear activation). • Constraints: ˆc = σ (Wczout + bc) ∈ [0, 1]k (sigmoid acti-vation). In joint mode ( c+o ), both heads are active; in objective-only ( o)or constraint-only ( c) mode, only the respective head is used. 

Adaptive scaling. For problems with a large number of in-put parameters ( n > 64 ), tokens are grouped by averaging over groups of size ⌈n/64 ⌉ to cap the effective sequence length at 64. For problems with a large number of targets ( q + k > 100 ), the architecture is automatically scaled down: the number of blocks is capped at 2, the embedding dimension at 128, and the parameter group size is increased (Table 1). 

S.1.2 ResNet 

The ResNet surrogate follows the simple residual network design for tabular data. 17 

> 10/31

Table 1. Adaptive scaling rules for FT-Transformer. 

Condition q + k > 100 q + k > 200 Max blocks L 2 2Max embedding dim d 128 96 Max heads H 4 3Min group size 2 4Pool every n blocks 1 1

Architecture. An input projection maps x to a dblock -dimensional representation. This is followed by B residual blocks, each consisting of: 

x′ = x+Dropout p2

 W2 Dropout p1 (ReLU (W1 BN (x) + b1)) + b2

 ,

(7) where BN is batch normalization, W1 ∈ Rdh×dblock with dh =

⌊m · dblock ⌋, and W2 ∈ Rdblock ×dh . The output heads are identical to those of the FT-Transformer. 

S.1.3 Training Procedure Optimizer. Adam with learning rate η = 0.001. 

Batch size. 2048 samples. 

Automatic epoch selection. The number of training epochs is determined automatically via K-fold cross-validation ( K = 3,standard KFold). The procedure is: 1. Compute a timeout budget: Emax =

max  25 , min  ⌊10 8/N⌋, 10 ,000  , where N is the number of training samples. 2. Set epoch increment: ∆E = max (10 , ⌊Emax /10 ⌋).3. For each fold, train in increments of ∆E epochs with early stopping (patience = min (250 , Emax ) epochs, monitoring validation loss). Training also terminates on NaN. 4. The final epoch count is the mean of the stopped epochs across all folds. 

Loss functions. 

• Objectives: Mean squared error (MSE) by default. Alter-native losses available include Huber, Log-Cosh, weighted Log-Cosh ( ∑i wi · log cosh (yi − ˆyi) with wi = 1/(|yi| + 1)), distance-weighted MSE ( 11+|y| · (y − ˆy)2), and relative error (|y − ˆy|/(|y| + ε)). • Constraints: Binary cross-entropy. • Joint mode: The total loss is the sum of the objective and constraint losses: L = Lobj + Lconstr .

GradNorm multi-task balancing (optional). When enabled, per-objective learnable weights wi balance the multi-task loss via the GradNorm algorithm. 6 Training rates ri(t) = Li(t)/Li(0) 

> ¯L(t)/¯L(0)

are computed, and the gradient norm loss 

Lgrad = ∑

> i

∥G(i) 

> W

∥ − ∥ GW ∥ · rα 

> i

, α = 0.5, (8) where G(i) 

> W

is the gradient of wiLi with respect to the last shared layer, is minimized with SGD at learning rate 10 −4. Weights are re-normalized after each step to sum to the number of objectives. GradNorm was not enabled for any of the experiments reported in this paper; it was explored during development but did not yield consistent improvements over the default equal-weighted loss for the benchmark problems considered here. 

S.1.4 Input Normalization 

When parameter bounds xlb and xub are available (as in all our experiments), inputs are normalized via bounds normalization: ˜x j = x j − xlb , j

xub , j − xlb , j

. (9) Otherwise, an adaptive layer normalization is applied (z-score based on the training data statistics). 

S.1.5 Output Normalization 

Objective targets are normalized before training using a “range” scheme that provides a continuous down-weighting of large objective values to focus most of the learning on predicting lower objective values correctly (since that is the region of the search space most relevant to make optimization progress): 1. Per-objective min-max normalization: ¯y j = y j −ymin , j    

> ymax ,j−ymin ,j

,clipped to [0, 1].2. Global rescaling to the range [y∗

> min

, y∗

> max

] where y∗ 

> min

=

max j ymin , j and y∗ 

> max

= max j ymax , j.3. Log-transform: ˜ y = log (1 + ¯y).The inverse transform is applied at prediction time. Constraint targets (binary 0/1) are not normalized. 

S.1.6 Data Preprocessing NaN handling. Samples with any NaN objective value are removed (default behavior). Alternatively, NaN values can be replaced with 2 × max j y j per objective. 

Outlier filtering. When enabled (configurable threshold θ ), log-transformed objectives log (y + 1) are z-scored, and samples with |z| > θ are removed. 

Infeasible exclusion. Optionally, samples that violate all con-straints can be excluded from training. 

> 11/31

Table 2. Default hyperparameters for surrogate model architectures. 

Category Parameter FT-Transformer ResNet 

Architecture Number of blocks L / B 3 2Block dimension d / dblock 128 192 Hidden multiplier rff / m 2.0 2.0 Number of heads H 4 –Embedding dim per head 32 –Pooling CLS –Regularization Attention dropout pa 0.1 –FFN dropout p f 0.05 –Residual / block dropout pr / p1 0.1 0.15 Second dropout p2 – 0.0 Activation FFN / hidden GELU ReLU Normalization LayerNorm BatchNorm Training Optimizer Adam ( η = 0.001) Batch size 2048 Epoch selection 3-fold CV + early stopping Early stopping patience 250 epochs Loss Objectives MSE Constraints Binary cross-entropy Normalization Inputs Bounds: (x − xlb )/(xub − xlb )

Targets Range (min-max + log1p) 

## S.2 Gradient-Based Feasibility Solving 

This section details the gradient-based procedure by which the trained joint surrogate is used to transform parameter candidates toward feasible, high-performing regions of the search space. This supplements the gradient formulation presented in Equa-tion 1 of the main text. 

S.2.1 Optimization Procedure 

Given a batch of parameter candidates X ∈ RB×n and a trained joint surrogate f , we perform iterative gradient descent on X

while keeping the surrogate weights frozen. The procedure optimizes a composite loss over up to four targets: 

1. Objective minimization (“objective”). The surrogate pre-dicts objective values ˆy = fy(x), which are de-normalized to the original scale. The loss maximizes dominated hypervolume with respect to a dynamic nadir point r:

Lobj = −

> B

# ∑

> i=1
> q

# ∏

> j=1

max (r j − ˆyi j /(nadir j + ε), 0) , (10) where nadir j = max 



max i ˆyi j , max i ytrain 

> i j



and r j = 1.1 is the reference point factor. 

2. Constraint feasibility (“constraint”). The constraint head prediction ˆc = fc(x) is driven toward all-feasible via binary focal cross-entropy: 

Lconstr = BinaryFocalCE (1B×k, ˆc) . (11) 

3. Exploration (“distance”). To encourage diverse sampling, pairwise Euclidean distances between the current candidates and the training data are maximized: 

Ldist = − 1

B

> B

# ∑

> i=1

1

N

> N

# ∑

> j=1

˜xi − ˜xtrain   

> j2

, (12) where ˜ x denotes bounds-normalized parameters. 

4. Non-negativity (“zero”). An optional penalty for negative predicted objective values: 

Lzero = ∑ 

> i,j

[ReLU (− ˆyi j )] 2 . (13) 

S.2.2 Multi-Loss Gradient Balancing 

When multiple targets are active, their gradients are balanced by rescaling each gradient to match the L2 norm of the first (reference) gradient: 

gtotal = ∑

> t

∥∇XL1∥∥∇XLt ∥ + ε · ∇XLt . (14) 

S.2.3 Optimizer and Convergence 

• Optimizer: Adam (learning rate 0.001 ) for the standard case; SGD when using the “zero-infeasible” mode. • Maximum iterations: 1000 (configurable). • Parameter bounds: After each gradient step, parameters are clipped to [xlb , j, xub , j].

12/31 • Plateau detection: The interquartile range (IQR) of the loss over the last 50 iterations is monitored. If IQR / 

|median | < 0.01, optimization is terminated early. 

S.2.4 Integration with Black-Box Optimization 

The gradient-based feasibility solving does not replace the black-box optimizer but augments it. In each optimization epoch, the NSGA-II population is split: the elite half is preserved, and the remaining candidates are transformed via gradient descent on the surrogate. This hybrid strategy avoids the local-minima prob-lem of pure gradient descent while exploiting smooth surrogate gradients for directed search. 

Algorithm 1 Surrogate-gradient-augmented optimization epoch 

Require: Population P = {x1, . . . , xM }, trained surrogate f 

> 1:

Sort P by non-dominated rank and crowding distance  

> 2:

Pelite ← P[1 : M/2] ▷ preserve top half  

> 3:

Pexplore ← P[M/2 + 1 : M] 

> 4:

P′ 

> explore

← MAKE FEASIBLE ( f , Pexplore ) ▷ gradient descent on surrogate  

> 5:

P′ ← Pelite ∪ P′ 

> explore
> 6:

Evaluate P′ on true simulator ▷ expensive  

> 7:

return P ′

S.2.5 Trace Sampling for Surrogate Bootstrapping 

During gradient descent, intermediate parameter states form a trajectory (“trace”) through the search space. To extract maxi-mally informative samples from this trajectory for bootstrapping the surrogate model (as in Figure 4B of the main text), we apply a diversity filter: 1. Predict objectives ˆ yt at each step t of the trajectory. 2. Normalize predictions via min-max scaling. 3. Iteratively remove the point with the smallest minimum pairwise Euclidean distance to any remaining point, until k

points remain. This yields a set of k diverse samples spanning the gradient descent path, which are then evaluated on the true simulator to augment the training set. 

## S.3 Sensitivity-Informed Sampling 

S.3.1 Surrogate Gradient Sensitivity 

The partial derivatives of the trained surrogate provide a natural estimate of parameter sensitivity. For each parameter x j and objective ˆ yk, the elasticity (relative sensitivity) is: 

S(k) 

> j

= ∂ ˆyk

∂ x j

· x j, (15) computed via automatic differentiation ( tf.GradientTape )and averaged (in absolute value) across all input samples: ¯S j = 1

N

> N

# ∑

> i=1

|S(k) 

> j

(xi)|. (16) This computation is batched (batch size 1024) for memory effi-ciency and is a by-product of the trained surrogate, requiring no additional simulation evaluations. 

S.3.2 Mapping to NSGA-II Distribution Indices 

Sensitivity values are converted to NSGA-II crossover and mu-tation distribution indices, which control the spread of offspring around parents: 

ηcross  

> j

= ηmut  

> j

= clip  1 + | ¯S j| × 20 , [1, 30 ] . (17) High sensitivity (large | ¯S j|) yields a large distribution index, producing offspring close to the parent in that dimension (small perturbation). Low sensitivity yields a small distribution index, enabling larger exploration steps. This focuses the search on fine-tuning sensitive parameters while broadly exploring insensitive ones. 

S.3.3 Cross-Check Control Experiment 

To verify that the sensitivity-informed sampling genuinely im-proves optimization, we include a control experiment with in-verted distribution indices: 

ηinv  

> j

= 21 − η j, (18) which applies small perturbations to insensitive parameters and large perturbations to sensitive ones—the opposite of the in-tended strategy. 

S.3.4 Comparison with Established Methods 

We compare surrogate-gradient sensitivity against two estab-lished methods: • FAST (Fourier Amplitude Sensitivity Test): 29 A variance-based global method implemented via SALib. • DGSM (Derivative-based Global Sensitivity Measure): 37 

Finite-difference derivatives, also via SALib. Both FAST and DGSM require dedicated simulation budgets for their sampling designs. In contrast, surrogate-gradient sensitivity operates on the already-trained surrogate model, requiring only forward and backward passes over the training data. 

## S.4 Optimization Loop and Dynamic Sampling 

S.4.1 Iterative Pipeline 

The optimization follows an iterative surrogate-assisted loop (Algorithm 2). 

> 13/31

Algorithm 2 Surrogate-assisted optimization loop 

Require: Parameter bounds [xlb , xub ], initial sample count N0,evaluations per epoch Ne, number of epochs E 

> 1:

X0 ← SymmetricLatinHypercube (N0) 

> 2:

(Y0, C0) ← Evaluate (X0) 

> 3:

for e = 1, . . . , E do  

> 4:

Train surrogate f on (X0: e−1, Y0: e−1, C0: e−1) with auto-matic epoch selection  

> 5:

Compute sensitivity ¯ S j from f ▷ Optional  

> 6:

Run NSGA-II on f with sensitivity-informed distribu-tion indices to generate Ne candidates  

> 7:

If feasibility solving enabled: transform candidates via gradient descent on f 

> 8:

(Ye, Ce) ← Evaluate (candidates ) ▷ Expensive simulation  

> 9:

Append results to cumulative dataset  

> 10:

end for S.4.2 Configuration Evaluations per epoch. Default: 100 problem evaluations per epoch. In the dynamic sampling variant, this is split into 4 sub-iterations of 25 samples each, with surrogate retraining between sub-iterations. 

Initial sampling. Symmetric Latin Hypercube (SLHC) sam-pling is used for the initial sample set. The default initial sample count is problem-specific (typically 100-1000, scaled with di-mensionality). 

Stopping criteria. Two modes are supported: • Fixed budget: A predetermined number of epochs E (25 for single-cell problems, 50 for the network problem). • Dynamic: A configurable convergence criterion evaluated as a Python expression on the optimization history, e.g., 

"iteration > 3 and max(recent(’ecov’, 3)) < 0.1" .

Surrogate mode auto-detection. If fewer than 3 unique con-straint patterns are observed in the training data, the surrogate mode automatically falls back from c+o (joint) to o (objective-only) to avoid degenerate constraint classification. 

Default configuration. All experiments reported in this paper used the default configuration as defined in the DMOSOPT source code, including the default NaN handling (removal), no outlier filtering, no infeasible exclusion, and fixed-budget stopping. The only experiment-specific settings were the number of epochs, population size, and surrogate architecture, as detailed in the respective benchmark sections. 

## S.5 dmosopt Framework and Distributed Execu-tion 

S.5.1 Software Architecture  

> DMOSOPT

(Distributed Multi-Objective Surrogate-Assisted 

Opt imization) is an open-source Python framework built on top of MPI for high-performance computing scalability. The architecture follows a controller-worker model: • Controller: Manages the optimization state, trains the surrogate model, selects candidate solutions, and dispatches evaluation tasks. • Workers: Receive parameter vectors from the controller, run the (potentially expensive) simulation, and return ob-jective values, features, and constraint satisfaction. Communication between controller and workers uses MPI point-to-point messaging. The surrogate model resides on the controller, avoiding data transfer overhead. Optionally, surrogate training can be offloaded to a remote GPU node via a (remote-)filesystem-based swap queue mechanism. 

S.5.2 Configurable Components 

• Optimizers: NSGA-II, 9 AGE-MOEA, 32 SMPSO, 31 CMA-ES. 19 

• Surrogates: Gaussian Process Regression (GPR, Mat ´ern 5/2 kernel), Multi-Expert Gaussian Process (MEGP; fits an independent GP per objective, enabling multi-output prediction without cross-output correlations), ResNet, FT-Transformer (this work), and custom models via a plugin interface. GP surrogates are trained exclusively on feasible samples, whereas neural network surrogates train on all available data including infeasible samples. • Samplers: Symmetric Latin Hypercube (SLHC), Latin Hypercube (LHC), Monte Carlo (MC), Sobol sequences, Good Lattice Points (GLP). • Sensitivity methods: Surrogate gradient, FAST, DGSM. 

S.5.3 Computational Environment 

All large-scale experiments (Figures 2-5) were executed on the Frontera supercomputer at the Texas Advanced Computing Cen-ter (TACC). Each compute node contains two Intel Xeon Plat-inum 8280 (Cascade Lake) processors with 28 cores each (56 cores per node, 2.7 GHz base clock, 192 GB RAM). MPI com-munication used MVAPICH2. For the CA1 network problem (Figure 5), each worker used 300 cores (approximately 5.4 nodes) for a single simulation evaluation, with a wall-clock time of ∼42 .3 s per evaluation. Surrogate training was performed on a Frontera GPU node (NVIDIA Quadro RTX 5000); for the single-cell problems, FT-Transformer training completed in ∼150 - 235 s per epoch de-pending on cell type, which is negligible relative to the ∼42 .3 s

× 100 evaluation budget per epoch. 

> 14/31

Table 3. Software dependencies and versions.                                  

> Package Version Purpose
> Python ≥3.11 Runtime TensorFlow 2.16.2 Surrogate model training PyTorch 2.5.1 (CPU) MEGP baseline (via GPyTorch) GPyTorch ≥1.13 Gaussian process models NEURON 8.2.6 Biophysical neuron simulation dmosopt commit f034729 Optimization framework MiV-Simulator commit e440eaa Network simulation SALib ≥1.5.1 Sensitivity analysis (FAST, DGSM) scikit-learn (transitive) Metrics, CV splitting matplotlib ≥3.9.2 Visualization seaborn ≥0.13.2 Statistical plotting machinable 4.10.6 Experiment tracking

## S.6 Benchmark Problem Specifications 

This section provides the full specification of all benchmark problems, including parameter spaces, objectives, constraints, and simulation parameters. The main text (Section 4) gives a summary; the details below are intended for reproducibility. 

S.6.1 CA1 Hippocampal Interneuron Single-Cell Models 

We optimize 9 morphologically distinct CA1 hippocampal in-terneuron types using 2-compartment Pinsky-Rinzel neuron models 33 implemented in the NEURON simulator. 21 Each model consists of a somatic and dendritic compartment coupled by an adjustable conductance gc, with Hodgkin-Huxley-type active conductances (Na +, K +, Ca 2+, KCa). 

S.6.2 Parameter Space 

The search space contains 10-15 parameters per cell type, gov-erning compartment geometry, coupling conductance, maximal channel conductances, passive leak conductances, and calcium dynamics. Table 4 lists the parameters for a representative cell type (BS, bistratified). Other cell types share the same parameter set with adjusted bounds; the complete specification for all cell types is available in the code repository. 

S.6.3 Objectives 

Four objectives are minimized, each computed as the squared distance from the measured value to the target range [l, u]:obj (v) = d(v, [l, u]) 2 (19) 

d(v, [l, u]) = 

(

0 if l ≤ v ≤ u,

min (|v − l|, |v − u|) otherwise. (20) 1. Input resistance error (Rin ): Distance from measured Rin 

to target range. 2. Membrane time constant error (τ): Distance from mea-sured τ to target range. 3. Frequency-current (f-I) curve error : Mean squared range distance across M current injection steps:  

> 1
> M

∑Mm=1 d( fm, [ f lm, f um]) 2.4. Spike amplitude error : Mean squared range distance of spike amplitudes. 

S.6.4 Constraints 

Eight binary constraints determine feasibility: 1. Monotonic f-I: f (Im+1) > f (Im) for all consecutive current steps. 2. Rin range: 0 < Rin < 1000 M Ω.3. τ range: 0 < τ < 1000 ms. 4. Spike amplitude: Spike amplitude is not NaN (i.e., spikes are detected). 5. First ISI: All first inter-spike intervals exceed the lower bound. 6. ISI adaptation: ISI adaptation ratio is not NaN. 7. Pre-stimulus spike count: No spontaneous spikes before stimulus onset. 8. Initial voltage: |Vinit −Vtarget | < 1.0 mV. 

S.6.5 Electrophysiological Targets 

Electrophysiological targets for each cell type are derived from literature reports and matched to the corresponding experimental ranges. Table 5 summarizes key targets for all 9 populations. 

Simulation parameters. Integration time step dt = 0.0125 ms, recording step 0.01 ms, simulation duration 2000 ms, tempera-ture 36 ◦C. 

> 15/31

Table 4. Parameter space for the BS (bistratified) interneuron model.                                                      

> Parameter Description Lower Upper
> pp Soma area fraction 0.1 0.9
> Ltotal Total length ( μm) 10 80
> gc Coupling conductance (mS/cm 2)0.1 50
> soma gmax Na Soma Na +conductance (S/cm 2)0.001 0.9
> soma gmax K Soma K +conductance (S/cm 2)0.001 1.0
> soma g pas Soma leak conductance (S/cm 2)00.01
> dend gmax Ca Dendritic Ca 2+conductance (S/cm 2)0.0001 0.9
> dend gmax KCa Dendritic KCa conductance (S/cm 2)01.0
> dend g pas Dendritic leak conductance (S/cm 2)00.01
> cm ratio Capacitance ratio (dend/soma) 150
> dend d Caconc Ca 2+diffusion depth ( μm) 0.1 20
> dend beta Caconc Ca 2+decay rate (ms −1)0.01 0.1
> Fixed parameters: global diam = 10 μm, global cm = 3 μF/cm 2,e pas =−62 mV

Table 5. Electrophysiological targets for CA1 interneuron populations. Rin : input resistance (M Ω); τ: membrane time constant (ms); Vthr : spike threshold (mV). f-I column shows the number of current injection steps.                                                     

> Population Rin range τrange Vthr f-I steps # params Parvalbumin basket cells (PVBC) [53, 179] [5, 21] −37 612 CCK basket cells (CCKBC) [240, 320] [22, 29] −43 412 Ivy cells (IVY) [167.5, 367.2] [50, 70] −39 412 OLM cells (OLM) [500.5, 600.1] [30, 50] −44 412 Axo-axonic cells (AAC) [65, 179] [10, 14] −32 512 Bistratified cells (BS) [30.5, 109.1] [11, 15] −32 312 Neurogliaform cells (NGFC) [189, 223.4] [8, 10] −30 612 Schaffer collateral-associated cells (SCA) [410, 550] [23, 29] −43 415 Interneuron-specific cells (IS1,2,3) [128.3, 226.1] [11.6, 17.6] −44 .3610

Passive property measurement. Input resistance is measured as Rin = ∆V /∆I from a subthreshold current step. The membrane time constant τ is obtained by fitting V (t) = V0 + a · exp (−t/τ)

via scipy.optimize.curve fit , requiring a minimum signal-to-noise ratio of 20. 

S.6.6 Motoneuron Model 

The motoneuron model is a 2-compartment (soma + dendrite) NEURON model with Na +, K +, KCa, CaN (soma), and CaL, CaN, KCa (dendrite) conductances, based on the experimental characterization by. 5,30 

Fixed parameters. soma f Caconc = 0.004, 

soma alpha Caconc = 1, soma kCa Caconc = 8, 

dend f Caconc = 0.004, dend alpha Caconc =1, dend kCa Caconc = 8, global diam = 5 μm, 

global cm = 2 μF/cm 2, e pas = −62 mV, pp = 0.1, 

Ltotal = 120 μm. 

Targets. Rin ∈ [540 , 598 ] MΩ; τ ∈ [16 .308 , 19 .375 ] ms; threshold = −37 mV; 7 f-I current steps at 

I ∈ {20 , 30 , 40 , 50 , 60 , 70 , 80 } pA with target rates 

{3.88 , 9.09 , 11 .75 , 14 .29 , 15 .96 , 16 .58 , 18 .25 } Hz; spike amplitude ∈ [60 , 80 ] mV; ISI adaptation ratio ∈ [1.2, 1.6].

Objectives and constraints. Same as the CA1 models (Sec-tion S.6.1). 

S.6.7 CA1 Hippocampal Network Model 

The CA1 network model is a full-scale biophysical simulation of the hippocampal CA1 microcircuit based on previously pub-lished work, 3 implemented in the MiV Simulator 39 and simu-lated via NEURON with CoreNEURON. 

Network architecture. The model contains 836 ,970 neurons across 15 cell populations, connected by ∼10 billion synaptic projections. Major populations include pyramidal cells (PYR, 

N = 311 ,500 ), CA3 afferents ( N = 204 ,700 ), entorhinal cortex afferents (EC, N = 250 ,000 ), and 12 interneuron populations (PVBC, CCKBC, AAC, BS, OLM, IVY, NGFC, IS, SCA, and others). 

Slice composition. Large numbers of evaluations of the full 836,970-neuron model within the surrogate optimization loop are infeasible on the HPC hardware allocation available to us. Optimization was therefore performed on a subset (“slice”) of the network comprising approximately 8,700 neurons distributed across all 15 cell populations, with per-population counts listed in table 7. 

> 16/31

Table 6. Motoneuron parameter space: narrow range (used in the standard optimization) and wide range (used in Figure 4).                                                              

> Narrow range Wide range Parameter Description Lower Upper Lower Upper
> gc Coupling conductance 0.1 202
> soma gmax Na Somatic Na +0.1 0.3 01
> soma gmax K Somatic K +0.01 0.3 01
> soma gmax KCa Somatic KCa 0.0001 0.01 01
> soma gmax CaN Somatic CaN 0.00001 0.03 01
> soma g pas Somatic leak 0.00001 0.01 01
> dend gmax CaL Dendritic CaL 0.00001 0.001 01
> dend gmax CaN Dendritic CaN 0.00001 0.001 01
> dend gmax KCa Dendritic KCa 0.0001 0.005 01
> dend g pas Dendritic leak 0.00001 0.01 01
> cm ratio Capacitance ratio 1.0 40.0 140

Table 7. Neuron counts per population in the CA1 network slice used for surrogate optimization. 

Population Slice count 

Pyramidal (PYR) 7,825 Parvalbumin basket cells (PVBC) 142 CCK basket cells (CCKBC) 104 Ivy cells (IVY) 217 Neurogliaform cells (NGFC) 93 OLM cells (OLM) 43 Axo-axonic cells (AAC) 37 Bistratified cells (BS) 63 Schaffer collateral-associated cells (SCA) 12 Interneuron-specific cells (IS1,2,3) 176 

Total 8,712 

Network inputs CA2 afferents 1,017 CA3 afferents 5,181 Entorhinal cortex (EC) afferents 6,222 

Total 12,420 

All projection pathway types and single-cell biophysical de-tails were retained. The 142 optimizable synaptic weight param-eters span the same projection pathways as in the full model. 

Optimizable parameters. The search space comprises n =

142 synaptic weight parameters governing connection strengths across all projection pathways. Each parameter controls the weight of a specific pre-synaptic population → post-synaptic compartment → receptor type projection (e.g., AMPA, NMDA, GABA A, GABA B), with bounds of the form [0.1, u] where u ∈{2, 10 , 20 } depending on connection type. 

Objectives. Per-population firing rate, mean fraction of active cells, and standard deviation of the fraction of active cells, mea-sured in 50 ms bins, for each of 12 target populations (PYR and 11 interneuron types), yielding 36 objectives (3 metrics × 12 populations). Objectives are formulated as absolute deviations from experimentally determined target ranges. 

Constraints. Each of the 12 target populations must exhibit a positive firing rate, yielding 12 binary constraints. 

Optimizer settings. NSGA-II with population size 100, 10 generations per epoch, resampling fraction 0.1, up to 50 epochs. Surrogates compared: GPR (Mat ´ern 5/2), MEGP, and joint c+o FT-Transformer. 

Computational cost. Each simulation evaluation requires 

∼42 .3 s on 300 CPU cores ( ∼5.4 Frontera nodes). At 100 evaluations per epoch and 50 epochs, the total compute cost ranges from ∼60 to ∼300 CPU-days depending on the surrogate method. 

## S.7 Evaluation Metrics 

S.7.1 Optimization Quality Metrics Normalized Hypervolume (HV). The hypervolume indicator measures the volume of objective space dominated by a Pareto front approximation A with respect to a reference point r:HV (A) = Vol [

> a∈Aq

# ∏

> j=1

[a j, r j]

!

. (21) We normalize the hypervolume by using a shared nadir point computed as the component-wise maximum across all compared methods for each problem instance. The reference point is set to 

r j = 1.1 × nadir j. The theoretical maximum normalized hyper-volume for q = 4 objectives is 1 .14 ≈ 1.4641. 

HV Area Under the Curve (HV-AUC). The area under the hypervolume convergence curve over optimization epochs, com-puted via the trapezoidal rule ( sklearn.metrics.auc ). Higher values indicate faster convergence. 

> 17/31

Inverted Generational Distance (IGD). The average mini-mum Euclidean distance from each point in a reference front R

to the closest point in the approximation front A:IGD (A, R) = 1

|R| ∑

> r∈R

min  

> a∈A

∥a − r∥2. (22) Lower values indicate better coverage and convergence to the reference front. 

Additive ε-indicator. The minimum additive shift ε such that every point in the reference front B is weakly dominated by at least one point in the approximation A:

Iε+(A, B) = max  

> b∈B

min  

> a∈A

max 

> j=1,..., q

(a j − b j). (23) A value ≤ 0 means A dominates B; smaller values are better. 

Set Coverage (C-metric). The fraction of solutions in B that are dominated by at least one solution in A:

C(A, B) = |{ b ∈ B : ∃ a ∈ A, a ⪯ b}| |B| . (24) 

S.7.2 Surrogate Quality Metrics Normalized Root Mean Squared Error (NRMSE). 

NRMSE = 1

q

> q

# ∑

> j=1

q 1 

> N

∑Ni=1(yi j − ˆyi j )2

max i yi j − min i yi j 

. (25) 

## S.8 Trials, Error Bars, and Statistical Tests 

S.8.1 Independent Trials 

Each optimization experiment was repeated with independent random seeds to enable statistical comparison. The number of independent trials per experiment type is summarized in Table 8. The CA1 network optimization (Figure 5) was run once per surrogate method due to the high computational cost ( ∼60 – 300 CPU-days per run). All single-cell and motoneuron experiments were replicated 3 times with independent random seeds; sensi-tivity and sampling experiments used 5 replicates to improve the precision of the comparison. 

S.8.2 Error Bars 

All error bars and shaded uncertainty bands in the figures rep-resent the standard error of the mean (SEM) unless otherwise noted: SEM = σ

√n , (26) where σ is the sample standard deviation and n is the number of independent trials. Table 9 details the error representation used in each figure. Convergence curves (Figures 3, 4, 8) plot the mean normalized hypervolume across trials as the central line, with SEM shaded bands ( ±1 SEM, α = 0.05 transparency). For the HV-AUC heatmaps (Figure 3), cell annotations report mean ± standard deviation. 

S.8.3 Statistical Tests 

Significance levels in figures are reported as: ∗ p < 0.05 , ∗∗ p <

0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001. 

Outlier filtering for pooled metrics. Before pooling NRMSE values across populations for statistical testing, per-population z-score filtering is applied: values with |z| > 2 (where z is the z-score computed within each population) are excluded. This removes extreme outliers arising from occasional degenerate surrogate fits without discarding population-level variation. 

Superfront Composition The superfront analysis (Figure 16) is deterministic and does not involve error bars. Pareto-optimal solutions from all trials of all surrogate methods are pooled into a single merged set for each cell population, non-dominated sort-ing is applied, and the percentage contribution of each method is computed from the resulting non-dominated front. Since all trials are combined, the superfront reflects the best solutions found across all replicates. 

CA1 Network Experiment The CA1 network optimiza-tion (Figure 5) was conducted as a single run per surrogate method due to the computational cost ( ∼42 .3 s per evaluation 

× 300 cores × up to 5,000 total evaluations). Consequently, no error bars or statistical tests are reported for the network-level results. The convergence curves show the hypervolume of the single run for each method. 

Wall-clock time. For the CA1 network optimization, the c+o-FTTransformer surrogate reached a solution quality comparable to GPR’s final hypervolume 39 epochs earlier, and comparable to MEGP 26 epochs earlier. In wall-clock terms (at 300 cores per evaluation, ∼42 .3 s per evaluation, 100 evaluations per epoch), this corresponds to a reduction from ∼55 hours (GPR/MEGP for 49 additional epochs) to ∼10 -25 hours (c+o-FTTransformer), a saving of ∼300-500 CPU-days. 

## S.9 Additional Results and Analyses 

S.9.1 Per-Population Random Sampling and Surrogate Baseline 

Before comparing advanced surrogate architectures, we estab-lish baseline performance using random sampling strategies and Gaussian Process Regression (GPR)-based surrogate opti-mization. The main text (Figure 2B) presents these baselines averaged across all CA1 interneuron types; here we provide the underlying per-population data to characterize problem-specific variation. Figure 6 shows the normalized hypervolume achieved by four initial sampling strategies - Monte Carlo (MC), Latin Hyper-cube (LHC), Symmetric Latin Hypercube (SLHC), and Sobol sequences - on each of the 9 CA1 interneuron populations. Two conditions are compared: (1) the hypervolume of the initial sam-ple set alone (red markers), representing pure random search without optimization, and (2) the hypervolume after 25 epochs 

> 18/31

Table 8. Number of independent trials (replicates) per experiment. Each trial uses a unique random seed generated by the experiment management framework ( MACHINABLE ).                     

> Experiment Figures Trials
> CA1 single-cell surrogate optimization 2, 3 3CA1 no-surrogate baseline 33CA1 optimizer comparison (NSGA-II, AGE-MOEA, SMPSO) 33CA1 sensitivity analysis (surrogate gradient, FAST, DGSM) 35CA1 initial sampling strategy comparison 35Motoneuron surrogate optimization 43Motoneuron gradient-augmented optimization 43Motoneuron random sampling feasibility analysis 43CA1 network optimization (full-scale) 51

Table 9. Error bar representation across figures.                                              

> Figure Panel / Plot Error representation
> Fig. 2 Online prediction accuracy (MAE) SEM ( n=3 trials) Fig. 2 NRMSE / MAPE bar plots SEM ( n=3 trials) Fig. 2 Additive ε-indicator SEM ( n=3 trials) Fig. 2 Sampling method comparison (HV) Std. dev. ( n=3 trials) Fig. 3 Convergence curves (HV vs. epoch) SEM ( n=3 trials), shaded bands Fig. 3 Mean rank plot SEM ( n=3 trials) Fig. 4 Motoneuron convergence curves SEM ( n=3 trials), shaded bands Fig. 5 Network convergence curves No error bars ( n=1) Fig. 7 Per-population epsilon indicator Std. dev. ( n=3 trials) Fig. 8 All-population convergence SEM ( n=3 trials), shaded bands Fig. 14 Surrogate gradient Standard deviation

of GPR-based surrogate-assisted optimization starting from each initial sample set (blue markers). Horizontal lines indicate the mean across sampling strategies; the green dashed line marks the theoretical maximum hypervolume (1 .14 ≈ 1.4641). Several observations emerge from this analysis: • Initial sampling quality: The choice of initial sampling strategy has a modest effect on the starting hypervolume. Symmetric Latin Hypercube (SLHC) and Sobol sequences tend to provide slightly better initial coverage than Monte Carlo, though the differences are small relative to the total optimization improvement. • Population-specific difficulty: Populations differ substan-tially in baseline optimization difficulty. IS and PVBC achieve near-optimal hypervolume ( > 1.46 ) even with the GPR baseline, while NGFC and OLM show more modest final performance, reflecting harder constraint landscapes or more complex objective trade-offs. • Consistent improvement: Across all populations and sam-pling strategies, GPR-based surrogate optimization consis-tently improves hypervolume over the initial random sam-ple, demonstrating the value of surrogate-assisted search even with a simple GPR model. Table 10 summarizes the normalized hypervolume metrics achieved by each surrogate strategy across all CA1 cell types. The four surrogate categories compared are: GPR (Gaussian Process Regression), MEGP (Multi-Expert Gaussian Process), “o” (objective-only neural network surrogates, averaging ResNet and FTTransformer), and “c+o” (joint constraint-and-objective neural network surrogates). Populations are sorted by increas-ing mean hypervolume to highlight the range of optimization difficulty across cell types. 

S.9.2 Per-Population Epsilon Indicator 

The additive epsilon indicator ( Iε+, Section S.7) provides a com-plementary view to hypervolume by measuring how much each surrogate-assisted Pareto front must be shifted to dominate the no-surrogate baseline front. Negative values indicate that the surrogate front dominates the baseline; values closer to zero indicate better performance. Figure 7 shows the epsilon indicator for each surrogate method on each CA1 interneuron population (for global summary refer to Figure 2C in the main text). The indicator is computed by comparing the normalized Pareto front from each surrogate run against the corresponding no-surrogate baseline run. Error bars represent standard deviation across the n = 3 independent trials. 

S.9.3 Per-Population Convergence Curves 

The main text (Figure 3) shows representative convergence curves for selected cell types. Extended convergence curves for all 9 CA1 interneuron populations over 25 epochs are pro-vided in Figure 8. 

> 19/31 1.4625 1.4630 1.4635 1.4640
> 1.46 1.46

IS 

> 1.456 1.458 1.460 1.462 1.464
> 1.46 1.46

PVBC 

> 1.458 1.460 1.462 1.464
> 1.46 1.46

AAC 

> 1.42 1.44 1.46
> 1.44 1.46

CCKBC  

> 1.450 1.455 1.460 1.46 1.46

IVY    

> slh lh mc sobol 1.43 1.44 1.45 1.46
> 1.44 1.45

BS    

> slh lh mc sobol 1.0 1.2 1.4
> 1.21 1.46

OLM    

> slh lh mc sobol 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4
> 1.02 1.46

SCA    

> slh lh mc sobol 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4
> 1.18 1.46

NGFC    

> slh lh mc sobol 1.2 1.4

Mean     

> Normalized Hypervolume GPR surrogate baseline Random initial sampling Max Volume (1.4641) Mean (Baseline) Mean (Initial Sampling)

Figure 6. Per-population sampling and GPR surrogate baseline. Normalized hypervolume for 9 CA1 interneuron populations (panels) plus the cross-population mean (rightmost panel). Each panel compares four initial sampling strategies (MC: Monte Carlo, LHC: Latin Hypercube, SLHC: Symmetric Latin Hypercube, Sobol) under two conditions: initial random sampling only (red circles) and after 25 epochs of GPR surrogate-assisted optimization (blue circles). Horizontal colored lines show the mean hypervolume across sampling strategies for each condition. The green dashed line indicates the theoretical maximum hypervolume ( 1.14 ≈ 1.4641 ). Error bars represent standard deviation across n = 3 independent trials. The GPR surrogate consistently improves hypervolume over random sampling across all populations, with final performance varying by cell type due to differences in constraint satisfaction rates and objective landscape complexity. 

Table 10. CA1 single-cell surrogate comparison. Normalized hypervolume (mean ± std across n = 3 trials) for each surrogate strategy and cell type after 25 epochs of optimization. GPR: Gaussian Process Regression; MEGP: Multi-Expert Gaussian Process; o: objective-only neural networks (mean of o-ResNet and o-FTTransformer); c+o: joint constraint-and-objective neural networks (mean of c+o-ResNet and c+o-FTTransformer). Higher values indicate better Pareto front quality; the theoretical maximum is 1.14 ≈ 1.4641 . Populations are sorted by mean hypervolume (ascending). NGFC exhibits the lowest performance due to stringent constraint satisfaction requirements, while IS approaches the theoretical optimum across all methods. gpr megp o c+o Mean NGFC 0.0112 ± 0.0076 0.0133 ± 0.0085 0.0081 ± 0.0021 0.044 ± 0.028 0.019 ± 0.012 BS 0.484 ± 0.055 0.553 ± 0.055 0.549 ± 0.082 0.520 ± 0.046 0.527 ± 0.059 SCA 0.85 ± 0.25 0.98 ± 0.14 0.81 ± 0.10 0.87 ± 0.36 0.88 ± 0.21 OLM 1.27 ± 0.14 1.22 ± 0.20 1.18 ± 0.19 1.23 ± 0.14 1.23 ± 0.17 PVBC 1.288 ± 0.045 1.266 ± 0.068 1.258 ± 0.052 1.284 ± 0.056 1.274 ± 0.055 AAC 1.364 ± 0.026 1.367 ± 0.033 1.365 ± 0.037 1.366 ± 0.026 1.366 ± 0.031 CCKBC 1.431 ± 0.042 1.422 ± 0.031 1.422 ± 0.019 1.35 ± 0.14 1.406 ± 0.059 IVY 1.441 ± 0.030 1.441 ± 0.018 1.442 ± 0.018 1.436 ± 0.027 1.440 ± 0.023 IS 1.4562 ± 0.0030 1.4564 ± 0.0019 1.45770 ± 0.00098 1.449 ± 0.018 1.4549 ± 0.0059 Optimal 1.46 ± 0 1.46 ± 0 1.46 ± 0 1.46 ± 0 1.46 ± 0

20/31 0.0 0.5 0.4771 0.6235 0.2602 0.1410 0.0488 0.0813 IVY 

01 0.4917 1.0195 0.7877 0.4526 0.0315 0.0000 

PVBC 

01 0.8288 0.3193 0.2481 0.5899 1.0289 1.3798 

CCKBC 

02   

> 0.4351 1.6144 0.0145 0.0187 0.0083 0.0052

AAC 

0.00 0.25 Epsilon Indicator (%)     

> 0.2445 0.2710 0.1411 0.2075 0.1760 0.2331

IS 

01   

> 0.1775 1.1190 0.1697 0.1648 0.0798 0.0452

SCA 

010 7.8974 6.2759 7.5178 7.8373 7.2637 6.8057 

BS 

01 0.5369 1.4042 0.7927 0.8894 0.6356 0.5799 OLM 

gpr megp o-resnet c+o-resnet o-fttransformer c+o-fttransformer 0.0 2.5    

> 3.0448 1.5525 0.5511 0.8042 0.4092 0.4442

NGFC Figure 7. Per-population epsilon indicator. Additive epsilon indicator (%) for each surrogate method (GPR, MEGP, o-ResNet, c+o-ResNet, o-FTTransformer, c+o-FTTransformer) across all 9 CA1 interneuron populations. Each panel shows one population; bar heights indicate the mean epsilon indicator across trials, with error bars showing standard deviation. Lower values indicate better performance (the surrogate front is closer to dominating the baseline). The c+o-FTTransformer achieves consistently low epsilon values ( < 2%) across all populations, indicating that its Pareto fronts nearly dominate those of the no-surrogate baseline. 

21/31 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000 Evaluations 0 5 10 15 20 25 1.40 1.41 1.42 1.43 1.44 1.45 1.46 Norm. hypervolume SCA 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 Evaluations 0 5 10 15 20 25 1.456 1.458 1.460 1.462 1.464 IVY 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 Evaluations 0 5 10 15 20 25 1.458 1.459 1.460 1.461 1.462 1.463 1.464 PVBC 0 5 10 15 20 25 1.46200 1.46225 1.46250 1.46275 1.46300 1.46325 1.46350 1.46375 1.46400 Norm. hypervolume CCKBC 0 5 10 15 20 25 1.452 1.454 1.456 1.458 1.460 1.462 1.464 AAC 0 5 10 15 20 25 1.36 1.38 1.40 1.42 1.44 1.46 BS 0 5 10 15 20 25 Epoch 1.430 1.435 1.440 1.445 1.450 1.455 1.460 Norm. hypervolume OLM 0 5 10 15 20 25 Epoch 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 NGFC 0 5 10 15 20 25 Epoch 0.0002 0.0004 0.0006 0.0008 0.0010 +1.463 IS 

> 01
> 01
> 01
> 01
> 01
> 01
> 01
> 01
> 01

Max Volume gpr megp o-resnet c+o-resnet o-fttransformer c+o-fttransformer baseline Figure 8. Per-population convergence curves for all 9 CA1 interneuron types. 3 × 3 grid showing normalized hypervolume (HV) as a function of optimization epoch for SCA, IVY, PVBC, CCKBC, AAC, BS, OLM, NGFC, and IS populations. Each panel plots all 6 surrogate methods (GPR, MEGP, o-ResNet, c+o-ResNet, o-FTTransformer, c+o-FTTransformer; solid lines) and the no-surrogate baseline (dash-dotted). Shaded regions indicate standard error of the mean across replicates. Inset bar plots show the normalized inverted generational distance (IGD) for each method. The secondary x-axis (top) shows the cumulative number of simulation evaluations. The dashed horizontal line marks the theoretical maximum HV ( 1.14 ≈ 1.4641 ). Surrogate-assisted methods consistently reach higher HV in fewer epochs across all populations, with the c+o variants achieving the fastest convergence. The only exception is the bi-stratified (BS) cell where the surrogates converge noticeably slower than the no-surrogate baseline. For an extended discussion of this failure mode and how to overcome it, see Section S.9.4. 

22/31 S.9.4 Gradient Feasibility Solving Bi-stratified Cell 

With limited number of initial samples to bootstrap the surrogate, models may struggle to accurately capture the most promising regions of the search space, leading to slower convergence than direct optimization without surrogate. This is the case for the Bi-stratified Interneuron model (BS, see Figure 8), making it a suitable test case for our gradient-based feasibility solving procedure described in Section S.2. The strategy can be config-ured to optimize different target combinations: objectives only (∇(o)), constraints only ( ∇(c)), or both jointly ( ∇(c+o)). Fig-ure 9 presents the resulting convergence as measured by normal-ized hypervolume. Crucially, leveraging the surrogate gradient enables the surrogate optimization to converge faster than the no-surrogate baseline, confirming that surrogate-gradient guidance meaningfully improves surrogate optimization. 

S.9.5 Extended Sensitivity Analysis 

The main text (Figure 3C) compares sensitivity-informed sam-pling methods for the representative population Bi-stratified (BS). Here we provide the full results for the SCA, BS, NGFC, OLM interneuron populations, comparing three methods: FAST (Fourier Amplitude Sensitivity Test), DGSM (Derivative-based Global Sensitivity Measure), and sgrad (surrogate gradient sen-sitivity). 

S.9.6 Motoneuron Random Sampling Constraint Satisfac-tion 

The motoneuron (MN) benchmark defines 8 biophysical con-straints that candidate parameter vectors must satisfy (mono-tonic f-I, resistance range, time constant range, spike amplitude, first ISI, ISI adaptation, pre-spike count, initial voltage). Be-fore surrogate-assisted optimization begins, the initial sampling phase draws parameter vectors uniformly at random from the search space. Whether a sample satisfies each constraint depends critically on the extent of the search space. Figure 11 compares constraint satisfaction rates for four sam-pling strategies (LHS, Saltelli, Sobol, uniform) under two search-space configurations. In the wide range setting, only individual constraints with loose bounds (e.g., initial voltage) are frequently met; the joint satisfaction rate (“All of the above”) is extremely low ( <1%), reflecting the combinatorial difficulty of simultane-ously satisfying all constraints in a large parameter space. In the narrow range setting, per-constraint satisfaction rates are substantially higher, and joint satisfaction rises to approximately 10–20%. The choice of sampling strategy (LHS vs. Sobol vs. Saltelli vs. uniform) has a relatively minor effect compared to the search-space extent, indicating that the constraint landscape - not the quasi-random sequence - is the primary bottleneck for initial feasibility. These results motivate the gradient-based feasibility-solving procedure (Section S.2), which actively steers samples toward the feasible region rather than relying on random coverage. 

S.9.7 Motoneuron Narrow-Range Surrogate Optimization 

The main text (Figure 4) presents surrogate-assisted optimization results on the motoneuron benchmark with an expanded (wide-range) search space. Here we show the complementary narrow-range setting, where the parameter bounds are tighter and more biologically informed. Figure 12 reports normalized hypervolume convergence over 25 epochs for all 6 surrogate methods and the no-surrogate NSGA-II baseline. In this easier setting, all surrogate methods reach near-optimal hypervolume within 3-5 epochs, compared to 10-15 epochs for the baseline. The inset bar plots show (i) the inverted generational distance (IGD) of each method rel-ative to the no-surrogate Pareto front, and (ii) the percentage of simulation evaluations saved by converging earlier. Even in the narrow-range configuration, surrogate-assisted methods re-duce the number of required evaluations by 40-60%, confirming that the efficiency gains are not limited to difficult, wide-range problems. 

S.9.8 Extended Surrogate Gradient Descent Traces 

The main text (Figure 4B) shows the surrogate-guided gradi-ent descent trajectory for a single objective. Figure 13 extends this visualization to all four motoneuron objectives simultane-ously: input resistance error, membrane time constant error, f-I curve error, and spike amplitude error. Each panel plots the surrogate-predicted objective value (blue) alongside the true simulation value (green) over gradient descent steps. Orange vertical lines mark the trace samples selected by the diversity filter (Section S.2), and red-shaded regions indicate steps where the true simulation produced NaN (non-viable parameter config-urations). The close tracking between surrogate predictions and true simulation values across all four objectives demonstrates that the surrogate provides a reliable multi-objective gradient sig-nal. Occasional divergence between predicted and true values particularly near NaN regions highlights the importance of the diversity-filtered trace sampling, which re-anchors the surrogate to informative points along the trajectory. 

S.9.9 Surrogate Gradient vs. Black-Box Optimizers 

The dmosopt framework defaults to NSGA-II as the black-box optimizer that operates on the surrogate-predicted objective land-scape. An alternative approach is to bypass the black-box op-timizer entirely and use direct surrogate gradient optimization 

(sgrad), where candidate solutions are generated by following the surrogate gradient directly via backpropagation rather than through evolutionary search. We compare sgrad against several black-box optimizers across all surrogate architectures on the motoneuron benchmark. Figure 14 shows the normalized hypervolume AUC (area under the convergence curve over 10 epochs) for each surrogate-optimizer combination. The sgrad approach achieves com-petitive or superior performance compared to conventional black-box optimizers, particularly when paired with the c+o-FTTransformer surrogate. This result demonstrates that the 

> 23/31

1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 Evaluations 0 25 Epoch 1.38 1.40 1.42 1.44 1.46 Normalized hypervolume 

∇(c+o) (1.4547+/-0.0019) 

∇(o) (1.4515+/-0.0007) 

∇(c) (1.4500+/-0.0028) Max Volume c+o-fttransformer baseline Figure 9. Gradient target comparison on the BS population. Normalized hypervolume convergence over 25 epochs comparing three gradient descent target configurations: ∇(c+o) (joint objective and constraint optimization, magenta), ∇(o) (objective-only, green), and ∇(c) (constraint-only, blue). The c+o-FTTransformer surrogate without gradient augmentation (dotted line) and the no-surrogate NSGA-II baseline (dash-dotted line) are included for reference. Legend entries report final HV as mean ± SEM ( n = 3 trials). The joint ∇(c+o) configuration achieves the highest final hypervolume, demonstrating that simultaneously optimizing objectives and constraints during gradient descent produces the best solutions. The constraint-only ∇(c) variant converges more slowly, as it does not directly optimize the objectives. Shaded regions indicate ±1 SEM. 

differentiable surrogate models trained in dmosopt provide suf-ficiently smooth objective landscapes for gradient-based opti-mization to succeed, eliminating the need for population-based search entirely in some configurations. However, the relative advantage of sgrad varies by surrogate architecture, suggesting that the smoothness and accuracy of the surrogate landscape are important prerequisites for direct gradient optimization. 

S.9.10 Parameter Importance Analysis 

The surrogate gradient sensitivity analysis (Section S.3) yields per-parameter importance scores that quantify how strongly each model parameter influences the objectives. These scores are de-rived from the NSGA-II crossover distribution indices ( ηcross  

> j

), which are set proportionally to the absolute sensitivity: parame-ters with higher importance receive larger distribution indices, resulting in smaller perturbations during crossover to preserve good values. Figure 15 shows the relative importance of each parameter across four representative CA1 interneuron populations (SCA, BS, NGFC, OLM), computed as the mean distribution index nor-malized to sum to 1. The coupling conductance ( gc ) and somatic sodium conductance ( soma gmax Na ) consistently emerge as the most important parameters across all populations, reflecting their dominant role in shaping action potential generation and propagation between compartments. In contrast, calcium-related parameters ( dend gmax Ca , dend beta Caconc ) and pas-sive leak conductances show lower importance, suggesting that the optimization is less sensitive to their precise values within the search bounds. 

S.9.11 Superfront Composition Analysis 

To quantify which surrogate strategy produces the most compet-itive solutions across all methods, we compute the superfront, i.e. the combined non-dominated front obtained by merging Pareto-optimal solutions from all surrogate methods for each cell population. The contribution of each method is measured as the fraction of superfront members originating from that method. For each of the 7 CA1 interneuron populations analyzed (SCA, IVY, PVBC, CCKBC, AAC, BS, OLM; NGFC and IS are ex-cluded because NGFC exhibits near-zero hypervolume, making superfront analysis uninformative, and IS already approaches the theoretical maximum across all methods): 1. Collect Pareto-optimal solutions from all 6 surrogate experiments (GPR, MEGP, o-ResNet, c+o-ResNet, o-FTTransformer, c+o-FTTransformer). 2. Merge into a single point set and compute non-dominated sorting. 3. Record the originating method for each superfront member. 4. Report the percentage contribution of each method. 

24/31 SCA BS NGFC OLM Cell Populations 020000 40000 60000 80000 100000 120000 140000 IGD 

> Lower is better Higher is better

# HV IGD fast dgsm sgrad 

1.20 1.25 1.30 1.35 1.40 1.45 1.50 Normalized Hypervolume Figure 10. Sensitivity analysis method comparison across CA1 populations. Inverted generational distance (IGD, circles, left y-axis; lower is better) and normalized hypervolume (HV, triangles, right y-axis; higher is better) for three sensitivity-informed sampling strategies: FAST (red), DGSM (green), and sgrad (blue). Each marker shows the mean across n = 5 independent trials; error bars indicate ±1 SEM. The surrogate gradient method (sgrad) achieves competitive or superior IGD and HV compared to the established FAST and DGSM methods, while incurring no additional simulation evaluations - the sensitivity estimates are computed directly from the trained surrogate via automatic differentiation. Across most populations, all three methods yield similar performance, indicating that the optimization is robust to the choice of sensitivity method once sensitivity-informed sampling is enabled. 

25/31 SLH LH MC SOBOL Sampling strategy Constraint 0 0 0 094.88 94.75 94.86 94.76 40.84 39.49 40.88 40.17 100 100 100 100 0 0.01 0 00 0.01 0 099.92 99.88 99.91 99.91 94.88 94.75 94.86 94.76 0 0 0 0

Wide Range 

SLH LH MC SOBOL Sampling strategy 0.09 0.13 0.11 0.15 99.83 99.84 99.92 99.85 99.46 99.55 99.65 99.56 100 100 100 100 0.21 0.20 0.11 0.20 0.19 0.20 0.11 0.20 99.93 99.96 99.96 99.95 99.83 99.84 99.92 99.85 0.02 0.02 0.05 0.03 

Narrow Range 

020 40 60 80 100 Percent Figure 11. Constraint satisfaction under random sampling for the motoneuron benchmark. Heatmaps showing the percentage of random samples that satisfy each individual constraint (rows) and all constraints jointly (bottom row) for four sampling strategies (columns) in wide-range (left) and narrow-range (right) search-space configurations. Cell annotations give the percentage; colour scale runs from 0% (dark) to 100% (light). Wide-range sampling yields near-zero joint feasibility, whereas narrow-range sampling achieves 10–20% joint satisfaction. Sampling strategy has a comparatively minor effect relative to search-space extent. 1200 1250 1300 1350 1400 1450 1500 1550 1600 Evaluations 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0 Epoch 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 Normalized hypervolume 

Motoneuron (MN)  

> 02000 4000 6000 8000
> IGD
> 020 40 60 80 100 Evaluations saved (%)
> Max Volume gpr (1.4639) megp (1.4640) o-resnet (1.4640) c+o-resnet (1.4640) o-fttransformer (1.4640) c+o-fttransformer (1.4640) baseline (1.4611)

Figure 12. Surrogate optimization on the narrow-range motoneuron benchmark. Normalized hypervolume vs. epoch for 6 surrogate methods (GPR, MEGP, o-ResNet, c+o-ResNet, o-FTTransformer, c+o-FTTransformer; solid lines) and the no-surrogate baseline (dash-dotted). The secondary x-axis (top) shows cumulative evaluations. Shaded regions indicate ±1 SEM across replicates. Inset bar plots show IGD (lower right) and the percentage of evaluations saved relative to the baseline (upper right). The dashed horizontal line marks the theoretical maximum HV ( 1.14 ≈ 1.4641 ). All surrogate methods converge faster than the baseline, with c+o variants achieving the highest final HV. 

26/31 0 100 200 300 400 500 Surrogate Gradient Steps 0200000 rn 

## 0500 tau 

## 0500 fI 

## 0 100 200 300 400 500 02000 Spiking 

## True NaN Surrogate Trace samples Figure 13. Extended gradient descent traces for all motoneuron objectives. Four vertically stacked panels showing the surrogate-guided trajectory for each objective: input resistance (rn), membrane time constant (tau), f-I curve (fI), and spike amplitude (Spiking). Blue lines: surrogate predictions at each gradient step. Green lines: corresponding true simulation values. Orange vertical dotted lines: trace samples selected by the diversity filter and evaluated on the full NEURON model. Red-shaded bands: gradient steps where the true simulation returned NaN. The secondary x-axis gives the gradient step count. Close agreement between surrogate and simulation confirms that the surrogate gradient provides a reliable descent direction for all objectives simultaneously. 

27/31 age nsga2 sgrad smpso Optimizer fttransformer-c+o fttransformer-o gpr megp resnet-c+o resnet-o Surrogate 0.983±0.012 0.983±0.012 0.980±0.023 0.983±0.012 0.972±0.017 0.973±0.022 0.959±0.047 0.983±0.012 0.974±0.020 0.983±0.012 0.983±0.012 0.983±0.012 0.983±0.012 0.982±0.012 0.973±0.022 0.983±0.012 0.989±0.010 0.982±0.011 0.983±0.012 0.983±0.012 0.991±0.006 0.982±0.012 

Normalized Hypervolume AUC (mean ± std) 

> 0.95 0.96 0.97 0.98 0.99 1.00 Normalized AUC

Figure 14. Surrogate gradient (sgrad) vs. black-box optimizer comparison. Heatmap of normalized hypervolume AUC (higher is better) for each combination of surrogate architecture (rows) and optimizer (columns) on the motoneuron benchmark over 10 epochs. Cell annotations report mean ± std across replicates. Color scale ranges from 0.95 to 1.0. “sgrad” denotes direct surrogate gradient optimization via backpropagation; “nsga2” denotes the standard NSGA-II black-box optimizer used in the main experiments. The sgrad approach achieves competitive AUC across surrogate architectures, demonstrating that for this benchmark, direct gradient-based candidate generation on the differentiable surrogate is a viable alternative to population-based black-box search. However, success of direct surrogate descent may be undermined if the solutions are found in regions of the search space the model predicts confidently wrong. 

28/31 dend d Caconc Ltotal soma g pas dend beta Caconc dend gmax Ca cm ratio dend bq KAHP dend g pas pp dend aqs KAHP dend gmax KAHP soma gmax Na gc soma gmax K dend gmax KCa Parameters 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 0.35 Relative Importance 

Parameter Importance Across Cell Populations 

SCA BS NGFC OLM Mean Figure 15. Parameter importance across CA1 interneuron populations. Relative importance of each model parameter, computed from the surrogate gradient sensitivity analysis as the normalized mean crossover distribution index. Parameters are sorted by mean importance (black bars) across all populations. Colored bars show importance for individual populations (SCA, BS, NGFC, OLM). The sensitivity analysis identifies coupling conductance and compartment length as the most influential parameters, consistent with the known biophysics of these two-compartment models. 0 20 40 60 80 100 Superfront contribution (%) SCA IVY PVBC CCKBC AAC BS OLM c+o-fttransformer c+o-resnet gpr megp o-fttransformer o-resnet 

Figure 16. Superfront composition across CA1 interneuron populations. Stacked horizontal bar chart showing the percentage contribution of each surrogate method (GPR, MEGP, o-ResNet, c+o-ResNet, o-FTTransformer, c+o-FTTransformer) to the merged non-dominated superfront for each cell type. Longer bars indicate a greater share of Pareto-optimal solutions originating from that method. The c+o-FTTransformer consistently contributes the largest fraction across populations, reflecting its ability to produce high-quality solutions that remain competitive even when compared against solutions from all other methods. 

29/31 References 

[1] Laura A. Atherton, Luke Y. Prince, and Krasimira Tsaneva-Atanasova. “Bifurcation analysis of a two-compartment hippocam-pal pyramidal cell model”. en. In: J Comput Neurosci 41.1 (Aug. 2016), pp. 91–106. ISSN : 0929-5313, 1573-6873. DOI :

10.1007/s10827-016-0606-8 .[2] Maximilian Balandat et al. “BoTorch: A Framework for Efficient Monte-Carlo Bayesian Optimization”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . Vol. 33. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020, pp. 21524–21538. [3] Marianne J. Bezaire et al. “Interneuronal Mechanisms of Hippocampal Theta Oscillations in a Full-Scale Model of the Rodent CA1 Circuit”. In: elife 5 (2016), e18566. [4] Atharv Bhosekar and Marianthi Ierapetritou. “Advances in Surrogate Based Modeling, Feasibility Analysis, and Optimization: A Review”. In: Computers & Chemical Engineering 108 (2018), pp. 250–267. [5] Victoria Booth, John Rinzel, and Ole Kiehn. “Compartmental Model of Vertebrate Motoneurons for Ca2+-Dependent Spiking and Plateau Potentials Under Pharmacological Treatment”. In: Journal of Neurophysiology 78.6 (Dec. 1997), pp. 3371–3385. 

> ISSN

: 0022-3077. DOI : 10.1152/jn.1997.78.6.3371 .[6] Zhao Chen et al. “Gradnorm: Gradient Normalization for Adaptive Loss Balancing in Deep Multitask Networks”. In: 

International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, 2018, pp. 794–803. [7] Tinkle Chugh et al. “A Surrogate-Assisted Reference Vector Guided Evolutionary Algorithm for Computationally Expensive Many-Objective Optimization”. In: IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 22.1 (Feb. 2018), pp. 129–142. ISSN :1941-0026. DOI : 10.1109/TEVC.2016.2622301 .[8] Samuel Daulton, Maximilian Balandat, and Eytan Bakshy. “Differentiable Expected Hypervolume Improvement for Parallel Multi-Objective Bayesian Optimization”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems 33 (2020), pp. 9851–9864. [9] K. Deb et al. “A Fast and Elitist Multiobjective Genetic Algorithm: NSGA-II”. In: IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 6.2 (Apr. 2002), pp. 182–197. ISSN : 1089778X. DOI : 10.1109/4235.996017 .[10] Shaul Druckmann et al. “A Novel Multiple Objective Optimization Framework for Constraining Conductance-Based Neuron Models by Experimental Data”. In: Frontiers in Neuroscience 1 (Oct. 15, 2007). ISSN : 1662-453X. DOI : 10.3389/neuro. 01.1.1.001.2007 .[11] Salvador Dura-Bernal et al. “NetPyNE, a Tool for Data-Driven Multiscale Modeling of Brain Circuits”. In: eLife 8 (Apr. 26, 2019). Ed. by Upinder Singh Bhalla et al., e44494. ISSN : 2050-084X. DOI : 10.7554/eLife.44494 .[12] Alexander Forrester, Andr ´as S ´obester, and Andy Keane. Engineering Design via Surrogate Modelling: A Practical Guide .John Wiley & Sons, Sept. 15, 2008. 239 pp. ISBN : 978-0-470-77079-5. Google Books: ulMHmeMnRCcC .[13] Mudasir A. Ganaie et al. “Ensemble Deep Learning: A Review”. In: Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 115 (2022), p. 105151. [14] Jacob Gardner et al. “Gpytorch: Blackbox Matrix-Matrix Gaussian Process Inference with Gpu Acceleration”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems 31 (2018). [15] Jacob R. Gardner et al. “Bayesian Optimization with Inequality Constraints.” In: ICML . Vol. 2014. 2014, pp. 937–945. [16] Rafael G ´omez-Bombarelli et al. “Automatic Chemical Design Using a Data-Driven Continuous Representation of Molecules”. In: ACS Central Science 4.2 (Feb. 28, 2018), pp. 268–276. ISSN : 2374-7943, 2374-7951. DOI : 10.1021/acscentsci. 7b00572 .[17] Yury Gorishniy et al. “Revisiting Deep Learning Models for Tabular Data”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . Vol. 34. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021, pp. 18932–18943. [18] Ryan-Rhys Griffiths and Jos ´e Miguel Hern ´andez-Lobato. “Constrained Bayesian Optimization for Automatic Chemical Design Using Variational Autoencoders”. In: Chemical science 11.2 (2020), pp. 577–586. [19] Nikolaus Hansen. “The CMA Evolution Strategy: A Comparing Review”. In: Towards a New Evolutionary Computation .Ed. by Jose A. Lozano et al. Vol. 192. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2006, pp. 75–102. DOI : 10.1007/3-540-32494-1_4 .[20] Jose Miguel Hernandez-Lobato et al. “Predictive Entropy Search for Bayesian Optimization with Unknown Constraints”. In: 

Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning . International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, June 1, 2015, pp. 1699–1707. [21] Michael Hines, Ted Carnevale, and Robert A. McDougal. “NEURON Simulation Environment”. In: Encyclopedia of Computational Neuroscience . Ed. by Dieter Jaeger and Ranu Jung. New York, NY: Springer New York, 2022, pp. 2355–2361. 

> DOI

: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1006-0_795 .

> 30/31

[22] Yaochu Jin. “Surrogate-Assisted Evolutionary Computation: Recent Advances and Future Challenges”. In: Swarm and Evolutionary Computation 1.2 (2011), pp. 61–70. [23] Donald R. Jones, Matthias Schonlau, and William J. Welch. “Efficient Global Optimization of Expensive Black-Box Functions”. In: Journal of Global Optimization 13.4 (Dec. 1998), pp. 455–492. ISSN : 0925-5001, 1573-2916. DOI : 10. 1023/A:1008306431147 .[24] Joshua Knowles. “ParEGO: A Hybrid Algorithm with on-Line Landscape Approximation for Expensive Multiobjective Optimization Problems”. In: IEEE transactions on evolutionary computation 10.1 (2006), pp. 50–66. [25] Slawomir Koziel and Leifur Leifsson, eds. Surrogate-Based Modeling and Optimization: Applications in Engineering . New York, NY: Springer New York, 2013. DOI : 10.1007/978-1-4614-7551-4 .[26] Haitao Liu et al. “When Gaussian Process Meets Big Data: A Review of Scalable GPs”. In: IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems 31.11 (2020), pp. 4405–4423. [27] Turab Lookman et al. “Active Learning in Materials Science with Emphasis on Adaptive Sampling Using Uncertainties for Targeted Design”. In: npj Computational Materials 5.1 (2019), p. 21. [28] Henry Markram et al. “Reconstruction and Simulation of Neocortical Microcircuitry”. In: Cell 163.2 (2015), pp. 456–492. [29] Gregory J. McRae, James W. Tilden, and John H. Seinfeld. “Global Sensitivity Analysis—a Computational Implementation of the Fourier Amplitude Sensitivity Test (FAST)”. In: Computers & Chemical Engineering 6.1 (1982), pp. 15–25. [30] Gareth B. Miles et al. “Functional Properties of Motoneurons Derived from Mouse Embryonic Stem Cells”. In: Journal of Neuroscience 24.36 (Sept. 8, 2004), pp. 7848–7858. ISSN : 0270-6474, 1529-2401. DOI : 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1972-04.2004 . PMID: 15356197 .[31] A.J. Nebro et al. “SMPSO: A New PSO-based Metaheuristic for Multi-Objective Optimization”. In: 2009 IEEE Symposium on Computational Intelligence in Milti-Criteria Decision-Making . 2009 IEEE Symposium on Computational Intelligence in Milti-Criteria Decision-Making (MCDM). Nashville, TN, USA: IEEE, Mar. 2009, pp. 66–73. ISBN : 978-1-4244-2764-2. DOI :

10.1109/MCDM.2009.4938830 .[32] Annibale Panichella. “An Adaptive Evolutionary Algorithm Based on Non-Euclidean Geometry for Many-Objective Opti-mization”. In: Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference . GECCO ’19: Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference. Prague Czech Republic: ACM, July 13, 2019, pp. 595–603. ISBN : 978-1-4503-6111-8. DOI :

10.1145/3321707.3321839 .[33] Paul F. Pinsky and John Rinzel. “Intrinsic and Network Rhythmogenesis in a Reduced Traub Model for CA3 Neurons”. In: Journal of Computational Neuroscience 1.1–2 (June 1994), pp. 39–60. ISSN : 0929-5313, 1573-6873. DOI : 10.1007/ BF00962717 .[34] Astrid A. Prinz, Cyrus P. Billimoria, and Eve Marder. “Alternative to Hand-Tuning Conductance-Based Models: Construction and Analysis of Databases of Model Neurons”. In: Journal of Neurophysiology 90.6 (Dec. 2003), pp. 3998–4015. ISSN :0022-3077, 1522-1598. DOI : 10.1152/jn.00641.2003 .[35] Murat Sensoy, Lance Kaplan, and Melih Kandemir. “Evidential Deep Learning to Quantify Classification Uncertainty”. In: 

Advances in neural information processing systems 31 (2018). [36] Bobak Shahriari et al. “Taking the Human out of the Loop: A Review of Bayesian Optimization”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE 

104.1 (2015), pp. 148–175. [37] Ilya M. Sobol and Sergei Kucherenko. “Derivative Based Global Sensitivity Measures”. In: Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences 2.6 (2010), pp. 7745–7746. [38] Kevin Swersky, Jasper Snoek, and Ryan P Adams. “Multi-Task Bayesian Optimization”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . Vol. 26. Curran Associates, Inc., 2013. [39] Gaurav Upadhyay et al. “MiV-Simulator: A Computational Framework to Simulate Exact Scale in-Vitro Neuronal Networks”. In: 2023 (Jan. 1, 2023), p. D11.010. [40] Werner Van Geit et al. “BluePyOpt: Leveraging Open Source Software and Cloud Infrastructure to Optimise Model Parameters in Neuroscience”. In: Frontiers in Neuroinformatics 10 (June 7, 2016). ISSN : 1662-5196. DOI : 10.3389/fninf.2016. 00017 .[41] Ivan Voutchkov and Andy Keane. “Multi-Objective Optimization Using Surrogates”. In: Computational Intelligence in Optimization: Applications and Implementations . Ed. by Yoel Tenne and Chi-Keong Goh. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, 2010, pp. 155–175. DOI : 10.1007/978-3-642-12775-5_7 .