Title: FiLMMeD: Feature-wise Linear Modulation for Cross-Problem Multi-Depot Vehicle Routing

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.28102v1

Published Time: Fri, 01 May 2026 01:22:07 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
# FiLMMeD: Feature-wise Linear Modulation for Cross-Problem Multi-Depot Vehicle Routing 

Arthur Corrêa a,∗, Paulo Nascimento a and Samuel Moniz a

> a

University of Coimbra, CEMMPRE, ARISE, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Coimbra, 3030-788, Portugal 

A R T I C L E I N F O 

Keywords :Vehicle routing Multi-task learning Cross-problem generalization Curriculum learning Preference optimization 

A B S T R A C T 

Solving practical multi-depot vehicle routing problems (MDVRP) is a challenging optimization task central to modern logistics, increasingly driven by e-commerce. To address the MDVRP’s computational complexity, neural-based combinatorial optimization methods offer a promising scal-able alternative to traditional approaches. However, neural-based methods typically rely on rigid architectures and input encodings tailored to specific problem formulations. In real-world settings, heterogeneous constraints create multiple MDVRP variants, limiting the applicability of such models. While multi-task learning (MTL) has begun to accelerate the development of unified neural-based solvers, prior works focus almost exclusively on single-depot VRPs, leaving the MDVRP unaddressed. To bridge this gap, we propose Feature-wise Linear Modulation for Cross-Problem Multi-Depot Vehicle Routing (FiLMMeD), a novel unified neural-based model for 24 different MDVRP variants. We introduce three main contributions: (1) to improve the model’s generalization, we augment the standard Transformer encoder with Feature-wise Linear Modulation (FiLM), which dynamically conditions learned internal representations based on the active set of constraints; (2) we provide an initial demonstration of Preference Optimization in the MTL setting, establishing it as a superior alternative to Reinforcement Learning for future MTL works; (3) to mitigate the generalization gap caused by the introduction of multi-depot constraints, we introduce a targeted curriculum learning strategy that progressively exposes the model to increasingly more complex constraint interactions. Extensive experiments on 24 MDVRP variants (including 8 novel formulations) and 16 single-depot VRPs confirm the effectiveness of FiLMMeD, which consistently outperforms state-of-the-art baselines. Our code is available at: https://github.com/AJ-Correa/FiLMMeD/tree/main 

1. Introduction 

The vehicle routing problem (VRP) belongs to a class of canonical combinatorial optimization (CO) problems that hold wide importance in both the operations research and computer science communities. VRPs arise in numerous real-world applications, such as logistics and drone delivery (Cattaruzza et al., 2017; Li et al., 2019; Wang and Sheu, 2019). On one hand, due to the inherent NP-hard nature of the VRP, obtaining optimal solutions with exact algorithms is typically intractable for instances with more than a couple hundred nodes (Pessoa et al., 2020). On the other hand, heuristic algorithms offer a practical compromise, achiev-ing (near-)optimal solutions within manageable runtimes, but their design and tuning often depend on specialized expert knowledge. Recently, neural-based approaches have been gaining traction as an alternative approach to solve VRPs (Bengio et al., 2021; Bogyrbayeva et al., 2024). These methods leverage deep learning to approximate powerful policies, capable of finding high-quality solutions with min-imal computational overhead and domain expertise. How-ever, like conventional approaches, most existing neural-based methods are tailored and trained for specific types of VRP variants, which limits their applicability across diverse scenarios (Kool et al., 2019; Kwon et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2023). 

> ∗

Corresponding author  

> ajpcorrea@dem.uc.pt

(A. Corrêa); pnascimento@dem.uc.pt (P. Nascimento); samuel.moniz@dem.uc.pt (S. Moniz) 

> ORCID

(s): 0009-0000-4949-4791 (A. Corrêa); 0000-0003-4139-1100 (P. Nascimento); 0000-0002-7813-4514 (S. Moniz) 

1.1. Motivation 

Among existing VRP variants, the multi-depot VRP (MDVRP) is of particular practical relevance. It extends the classic VRP by considering multiple depots from where vehicles are dispatched. This setting has become increas-ingly important with the rise of e-commerce and growing customer expectations for faster deliveries, prompting com-panies to operate multiple depots (Lyu et al., 2023). Despite that, the MDVRP has been largely neglected by the neural-based CO literature, where most efforts have focused on the classic single-depot VRP. Furthermore, considering the sheer amount of existing VRP variants (Elatar et al., 2023), each defined by distinct sets of operational constraints, de-signing and training separate models for each one is imprac-tical. Crucially, in real-world logistics, these constraints are rarely static. A delivery fleet might face different daily requirements, from varying depot availability and time win-dows to backhaul requests and route length limits (Pillac et al., 2013) — depending on customer needs, seasonality factors or regulatory changes. Notwithstanding this fact, traditional solution methods are typically designed for fixed problem structures and constraints (Braekers et al., 2016), lacking the flexibility to adapt to different operating settings, often requiring a separate method for each scenario. Conse-quently, there is an existing need for a single unified routing model capable of solving diverse constraint combinations without being retrained each time. To address this, the literature has recently started to move towards the development of unified cross-problem 

A. Corrêa et al. Page 1 of 22 

> arXiv:2604.28102v1 [cs.LG] 30 Apr 2026 FiLMMeD: Feature-wise Linear Modulation for Cross-Problem MDVRP

models through the application of multi-task learning (MTL) (Liu et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2024a; Berto et al., 2025). MTL is a machine learning paradigm that allows a single model to learn from multiple related tasks simultaneously, leveraging shared representations to capture common struc-tural patterns across them (Zhang and Yang, 2022). In the context of VRPs, this allows a model to generalize across different problem variants without having to be retrained for each formulation. In spite of recent efforts, prior MTL studies have not explicitly targeted MDVRP variants. While RouteFinder (Berto et al., 2025) and CaDA (Li et al., 2025) have addressed MDVRPs to some extent, they operate in a zero- or few-shot learning manner, leading to substantial per-formance gaps relative to traditional non-neural baselines. In addition, existing MTL models do not structurally condition learned representations based on the active constraints of each VRP variant. Although CaDA introduced constraint prompts, it relies on static feature concatenation that treats constraints as high-level context rather than directly mod-ulating node embeddings. As a result, existing models still fail to distinguish the structural requirements of each variant, inducing gradient conflicts that limit their generalization across diverse constraint sets. Lastly, prior MTL works have relied on relatively simple training strategies. For example, MTPOMO (Liu et al., 2024) and MVMoE (Zhou et al., 2024a) train almost exclusively on variants with a single ac-tive constraint. Conversely, RouteFinder (Berto et al., 2025) samples all available variants simultaneously, regardless of the number of active constraints. While these strategies work well for single-depot VRPs, our experiments have shown that they are insufficient to achieve good generalization on MDVRP variants. 

1.2. Our contributions 

To mitigate the aforementioned challenges, this work proposes Feature-wise Linear Modulation for Cross-Problem Multi-Depot Vehicle Routing (FiLMMeD), the first MTL model explicitly targeting the MDVRP, to the best of our knowledge. Our main contributions are summarized as follows: 

• We introduce an MTL model capable of handling a wide range of MDVRP variants, including 8 new vari-ants with inter-depot routes. In total, FiLMMeD can solve 24 distinct MDVRP variants, including back-hauls, open routes, route length limits, time windows, inter-depot routes, and possible combinations between these constraints. 

• We introduce a feature-wise linear modulation (FiLM) mechanism (Perez et al., 2018) to condition node embeddings directly on the constraint attributes of each instance. FiLM is a conditioning technique that allows neural networks to adapt their internal repre-sentations based on auxiliary information. In our case, the conditioning input is a Boolean attribute vector indicating the presence or absence of each constraint. 

• To solve single-depot VRP variants with FiLMMeD, we fine-tune and train it using preference optimization (PO) instead of reinforcement learning (RL). PO is an emerging alternative to RL that has seen some appli-cations to CO recently (Pan et al., 2025a; Liao et al., 2025). As far as we know, this is the first application of PO in an MTL setting, being an initial demonstration of its potential for future MTL works. Through various experiments, we show that PO significantly outper-forms the traditional RL training of MTL models, having the potential to become the standard for future MTL works. 

• We propose a lightweight yet effective curriculum learning (CL) strategy for the MDVRP, which struc-tures training by gradually increasing the number of active constraints, leading to improved generalization. We show that, unlike single-depot VRPs where uni-formly sampling suffices, the MDVRP may induce more complex interactions between constraints, re-quiring a guided curriculum for effective generaliza-tion. We report extensive experimental results on 24 MDVRP variants and 16 single-depot VRP variants, with FiLMMeD achieving state-of-the-art performance and surpassing exist-ing MTL baselines. Ablation studies confirm the effective-ness of the proposed FiLM mechanism, CL training regimen and PO algorithm. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the relevant literature. Section 3 establishes im-portant background about our work. Section 4 details the main architecture and methodology in this study. Section 5 displays all computational experiments performed. Finally, Section 6 draws conclusions and possible future work direc-tions. 

2. Related Work 

2.1. Neural-based CO for VRPs 

Recently, neural-based methods have been growing as a promising third paradigm for CO problems, complement-ing (meta-)heuristics and exact algorithms (Bengio et al., 2021; Mazyavkina et al., 2021; Bogyrbayeva et al., 2024). Generally speaking, neural-based methods are, most of the time, construction-based , focusing on learning policies to incrementally build a solution in an end-to-end manner. One of the first prominent examples are Pointer Networks, a sequence-to-sequence method used to construct solutions autoregressively for the traveling salesman problem (TSP) (Vinyals et al., 2015). Pointer Networks marked an impor-tant paradigm shift in the literature, being one of the first demonstrations of the potential for neural-based CO solvers. Despite showing competitive performance on the TSP, it relied on supervised learning for training. Considering the NP-hard nature of many CO problems, computing (near)-optimal labels is non-trivial, especially for larger instances. Thus, to circumvent this, following works focused on train-ing with RL instead of supervised learning (Bello et al.,  

> A. Corrêa et al. Page 2 of 22 FiLMMeD: Feature-wise Linear Modulation for Cross-Problem MDVRP

2017; Nazari et al., 2018). Later, Kool et al. (2019) made a substantial contribution to the literature, developing an attention-based model (AM) inspired by the Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017). The AM is, up to this day, the inspiration and backbone for most existing VRP model architectures in the literature. After, Kwon et al. (2020) intro-duced POMO, a new training regimen for neural-based mod-els that exploits the symmetries inherent in CO problems. Their key contributions are twofold. First, they proposed REINFORCE with shared baselines, an algorithm that gen-erates multiple trajectories per instance, leveraging different solution starting nodes to compute a low-variance base-line. This stabilizes training and yields substantially faster convergence than the conventional REINFORCE algorithm. Second, they developed a lightweight instance augmentation technique using reflections and rotations. Together, both techniques have become a standard across almost all neural-based CO works, influencing most subsequent studies (Bi et al., 2025; Chalumeau et al., 2023; Corrêa et al., 2026; Drakulic et al., 2023; Grinsztajn et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2026; Lei et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2023, 2024b). Other less common approaches can be classified as 

improvement-based , which learn to iteratively refine an initially generated solution through local search operators (Chen and Tian, 2019; Hottung and Tierney, 2020; Ma et al., 2021; Hudson et al., 2022; Roberto et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2022; Ma et al., 2023). Typically, improvement-based meth-ods find higher-quality solutions than construction-based, but at the cost of significantly slower inference. Lastly, 

divide-and-conquer approaches have also been showing promise lately, learning to solve VRPs by decomposing an instance into multiple smaller sub-instances (Cheng et al., 2023; Fu et al., 2021; Hou et al., 2023; Kim et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021; Ye et al., 2024; Zheng et al., 2024; Zong et al., 2022). However, these methods may suffer from errors at sub-problem boundaries and increased training and implementation complexity. 

2.2. Multi-task learning for VRPs 

In recent years, the neural-based CO community has started to investigate the application of MTL to improve the generalization across different VRP variants. Liu et al. (2024) introduced MTPOMO, the first MTL-based approach for VRPs capable of solving 16 different variants through at-tribute composition. This work established a new paradigm for cross-problem learning, significantly influencing later MTL developments. After, Zhou et al. (2024a) proposed MVMoE, an approach built upon MTPOMO which incor-porates mixture-of-experts in its architecture. In a mixture-of-experts model, the network is divided into multiple spe-cialized sub-networks, called experts, each designed to learn distinct patterns or features. Then, a gating network selects the most relevant experts to be activated, depending on the given input. Another significant step forward is RouteFinder (Berto et al., 2025), which encompasses several technical innovations. RouteFinder adopts a modern Transformer-based architecture, including root mean square normaliza-tion (Zhang and Sennrich, 2019) and SwiGLU activations (Shazeer, 2020). It also employs mixed batch training, a technique that allows multiple different VRP variants to be processed simultaneously within the same batch, which leads to more stable training. Li et al. (2025) presented CaDA, incorporating a dual-attention mechanism that adds a new multi-head attention module to the encoder architec-ture, focused on capturing the information of closely related nodes. Specifically, this is achieved using top-k sparse at-tention, where each node only attends to its k most relevant neighbors. The aforementioned studies are considered as the backbone of MTL VRP research, inspiring most following works. Wang et al. (2025) introduced a soft-parameter-sharing model to balance task-specific and shared representations across different variants. Although improving performance over MTPOMO and MVMoE, its multiple separate Multi-Head Attention modules introduce significant more compu-tational burden and GPU memory footprint. Huang et al. (2025) presented ReLD, showing that adding a simple iden-tity mapping with a feed-forward layer to the decoder can significantly enhance its capacity. ReLD surpasses state-of-the-art performance on single- and multi-task settings, providing a great lightweight alternative to expensive heavy decoder Transformer models. Goh et al. (2025) proposed SHIELD, improving robustness to both cross-problem and cross-distribution generalization through hierarchical and sparsity mechanisms. More recently, Pan et al. (2025b) pro-posed MoSES, which reformulates VRP variants through a State-Decomposable Markov Decision Process and employs specialized LoRA experts with adaptive gating. Although it achieves strong performance, MoSES requires training and maintaining multiple task-specific expert networks, substan-tially increasing computational cost and memory footprint compared to previous architectures. In an effort to model the highly varied topologies inherent to different VRP variants, Liu et al. (2025) introduced a novel pre-training framework based on mixed curvature. Rather than relying on a single geometric space, their approach maps nodes into a compos-ite manifold that fuses Euclidean, spherical, and hyperbolic dimensions, providing the architectural flexibility required to capture the diverse underlying topological structures of different variants. Finally, Zheng et al. (2025) presented MTL-KD, leveraging knowledge distillation for a better cross-size generalization. 

Remark. Recent MTL advances have improved cross-problem generalization for neural VRP solvers, yet signif-icant gaps remain. First, existing approaches focus almost exclusively on single-depot variants, leaving the multi-depot setting — critical for modern logistics — largely unad-dressed. Second, while some works incorporate constraint information through static feature concatenation or prompt-based conditioning, they fail to dynamically modulate inter-nal representations based on active constraint combinations.   

> A. Corrêa et al. Page 3 of 22 FiLMMeD: Feature-wise Linear Modulation for Cross-Problem MDVRP
> Figure 1: MDVRP constraints addressed in our work.

This approach exacerbates gradient interference across di-verse variants, restricting generalization. Third, prior train-ing strategies (whether uniformly sampling single-constraint variants or simultaneous exposure to all variants), while effective on the single-depot setting, have shown limited generalization on the MDVRP. Lastly, the reliance on RL-based training in MTL settings limits convergence stability and solution quality, suffering from gradient interference and diminishing reward signals, as noted by Pan et al. (2025a). These limitations motivate our contributions, with our work diverging from previous efforts in multiple key aspects: we explicitly focus on the underexplored multi-depot setting, which has received limited attention in neural-based research; we introduce a lightweight FiLM mechanism to explicitly condition the learned representations on the active combination of problem constraints, showing that it effectively disentangles the latent space of node embeddings, leading to improved generalization; we design a dedicated CL training regimen for the multi-depot setting, which grad-ually increases the complexity of training by the number of active constraints in the variants sampled, outperforming prior training strategies; finally, we employ PO to fine-tune and train FiLMMeD model on single-depot variants, demon-strating that it significantly outperforms the conventional REINFORCE loss function, establishing it as a promising direction for future MTL works. 

3. Preliminaries 

3.1. Problem definition 

In this study, we solve 24 different MDVRP variants, whose formulations we describe in this subsection. A classic MDVRP instance is defined on a graph  = { , }. Here, 

 = { 𝑣 0, ..., 𝑣 𝑚 −1 , 𝑣 𝑚 , ..., 𝑣 𝑚 +𝑛 −1 } is the set of nodes in the problem, where 𝑑 = { 𝑣 0, ..., 𝑣 𝑚 −1 } denotes 𝑚 depots and 

𝑐 = { 𝑣 𝑚 , ..., 𝑣 𝑚 +𝑛 −1 } denotes 𝑛 customers. The edge set 

 = { 𝑒 𝑖𝑗 ∶ 𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ , 𝑖 ≠ 𝑗, (𝑖, 𝑗 ) ∉ 𝑑 × 𝑑 } contains all connections between distinct nodes, excluding direct depot-to-depot edges. Each edge is associated with a travel cost 𝑐 𝑖𝑗 .At each depot, a fleet of vehicles is available, where each ve-hicle has a capacity limit 𝐶 . A fundamental constraint across all MDVRP variants is that every customer 𝑣 𝑖 has a demand 

𝛿 𝑖 , which must be satisfied by exactly one vehicle dispatched from one of the 𝑚 depots. The solution 𝜏 represents the sequence of nodes visited in the problem, and is composed of multiple individual routes, each corresponding to the path followed by a single vehicle. Once a vehicle completes its route, it must return to the depot from which it departed. A solution is feasible if all customer demands are satisfied and no vehicle exceeds the capacity limit on its assigned route. The objective is to find the optimal solution 𝜏 ∗ that minimizes the total travel distance across all vehicles. Besides the classic MDVRP, we also solve other variants by adding constraints on top of the original problem formu-lation. In our work, we explore five additional constraints, four of which have been addressed in prior MTL works, but mostly focused on single-depot VRPs (Liu et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2024a; Berto et al., 2025). We also consider another constraint specific to MDVRPs, which are inter-depot routes (Crevier et al., 2007; Ramos et al., 2020), leading to 8 addi-tional MDVRP variants previously unsolved in neural-based works. A brief description of the five additional constraints is provided below, and an illustration is provided in Figure 1. 

Backhaul (B): In the standard MDVRP, a vehicle’s load decreases whenever it visits a customer. In the MDVRP with backhauls (MDVRPB), some customers require pickups in-stead of deliveries, causing the vehicle’s load to increase. These customers are called backhaul customers, whereas traditional delivery customers are linehaul customers. In this paper, we adopt two different backhaul settings. Across the experiments compared to Zhou et al. (2024a), we use the mixed backhaul, in which a single vehicle may alternate between serving linehaul and backhaul customers without any strict precedence order. For experiments compared to Berto et al. (2025), a single vehicle must not alternate between back and linehaul customers, i.e., it may only visit backhaul customers after completing all its linehaul visits. 

Route length limit (L): In the MDVRP with route length limits (MDVRPL), the length/duration of each vehicle’s route must not exceed a prescribed threshold 𝐷 .

Open route (O): In the MDVRP with open routes (MDOVRP), vehicles are not required to return to their departure depot after completing their respective routes. Therefore, each route ends at the last visited customer. 

Time window (TW): In the MDVRP with time windows (MDVRPTW), each node 𝑣 𝑖 ∈  has an associated time window [𝑒 𝑖 , 𝑙 𝑖 ] and a service time 𝑠 𝑖 . A vehicle visiting node 

𝑣 𝑖 must arrive no later than 𝑙 𝑖 . Service can only begin within the time window [𝑒 𝑖 , 𝑙 𝑖 ], requiring a wait if the arrival is  

> A. Corrêa et al. Page 4 of 22

FiLMMeD: Feature-wise Linear Modulation for Cross-Problem MDVRP 

Table 1 

24 MDVRP variants with five constraints. Open Route (O) Backhaul (B) Duration Limit (L) Time Window (TW) Inter-depot routes (I) MDVRP MDOVRP ✓                                                   

> MDVRPB ✓
> MDVRPL ✓
> MDVRPTW ✓
> MDOVRPTW ✓✓
> MDOVRPB ✓✓
> MDOVRPL ✓✓
> MDVRPBL ✓✓
> MDVRPBTW ✓✓
> MDVRPLTW ✓✓
> MDOVRPBL ✓✓✓
> MDOVRPBTW ✓✓✓
> MDOVRPLTW ✓✓✓
> MDVRPBLTW ✓✓✓
> MDOVRPBLTW ✓✓✓✓
> MDVRPI ✓
> MDVRPIB ✓✓
> MDVRPIL ✓✓
> MDVRPITW ✓✓
> MDVRPIBL ✓✓✓
> MDVRPIBTW ✓✓✓
> MDVRPILTW ✓✓✓
> MDVRPIBLTW ✓✓✓✓

earlier than 𝑒 𝑖 . All depots are also assigned an ending time window, requiring vehicles to arrive at the depot before it. 

Inter-depot routes (I): The MDVRP with inter-depot routes (MDVRPI) is a relatively less-studied variant of the MDVRP. In this setting, vehicles are allowed to stop at any depot during a route to reload their capacity 𝐶 (hence the term inter-depot routes). However, each vehicle must still return to its original departing depot at the end of its route. Consistent with the general problem definition, direct depot-to-depot edges are excluded. The original MDVRPI formu-lation also includes route length limit constraints (Crevier et al., 2007; Ramos et al., 2020). However, in our work, we relax this requirement to allow for a broader set of MDVRPI variants. Nonetheless, some of the MDVRPI variants we consider do include route length limits (see Table 1). In total, we solve eight MDVRPI variants, whereas only four would be possible without relaxing the route length limit constraint. The combination of the aforementioned constraints lead to different MDVRP variants, which we detail in Table 1. 

3.2. Learning to solve MDVRPs 

Most neural-based models generate solutions autore-gressively by learning a policy 𝜋 𝜃 through an attention-based neural network (Kool et al., 2019; Kwon et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2024a). We adopt this approach, utilizing an encoder-decoder framework, where a complete solution is built timestep by timestep by framing the MD-VRP as a Markov decision process (MDP). The process begins with the encoder embedding an input instance 

based on its underlying features, such as node coordinates, demands and time windows. A decoder then constructs the solution autoregressively. At each timestep 𝑡 , it receives a state, from which it computes the probability of selecting each candidate node next to extend the partial solution. Similar to prior neural MDVRP models (Li et al., 2024; Corrêa et al., 2026), FiLMMeD constructs solutions by building one route at a time. To encourage systematic explo-ration of the solution space, the initial action is chosen deter-ministically following the POMO framework (Kwon et al., 2020). For example, in an instance with 50 customers and 3 depots, there may be up to 150 possible customer–depot initializations, resulting in 150 distinct trajectories (i.e., so-lutions) evaluated in parallel. After that, the model sequentially constructs the current route by selecting the next customer to be served, until it decides to end the route, which occurs when the agent selects the departure depot. Upon terminating the route, the agent selects the depot from where the next route will begin (which can be the same depot or not). The process repeats until a full solution is constructed. This decision-making sequence can be formalized as an MDP, whose individual components we describe below: 

State: At each timestep 𝑡 , the agent observes a state 

𝑠 𝑡 , which represents the current partial MDVRP solution. The state comprises the embeddings of the previously se-lected node together with state variables carrying informa-tion about the partial solution. 

Action: After observing the state 𝑠 𝑡 , the agent selects an action 𝑎 𝑡 ∈ 𝑡 , where 𝑡 denotes the set of feasible actions at timestep 𝑡 . Here, 𝑎 𝑡 can be of two types, as discussed before: 1) a depot node, which is chosen to either start a new route or terminate the current one. In the case of variants with inter-depot routes, a depot node (one that is different from the starting depot) can be chosen throughout a route to replenish the vehicle’s capacity; 2) a customer node, which represents the next node to be visited by the vehicle in the current route. 

State transition: After executing 𝑎 𝑡 , the environment transitions to a new state 𝑠 𝑡 +1 reflecting the updated partial solution. The vehicle’s capacity 𝐶 𝑡 , elapsed time 𝑇 𝑡 and route length 𝐷 𝑡 are updated accordingly, and its location is set to the coordinates of the selected node. The feasibility mask is then recomputed to exclude visited nodes, as well as any unvisited nodes that are no longer reachable due to the tighter constraints induced by the chosen action. 

Reward: The reward 𝑟 (𝜏, ) is computed after an entire solution 𝜏 is constructed for instance . It is defined as the negative sign of the total distance traveled by all vehicles, meaning that maximizing the expected reward corresponds to minimizing the total travel distance. 

Policy: Throughout training, the agent learns a decision-making policy 𝜋 𝜃 parameterized by an attention-based neu-ral network. At each timestep 𝑡 , given the current state 𝑠 𝑡 ,the policy outputs a probability distribution over feasible next nodes, guiding the choice of action 𝑎 𝑡 . Then, the agent chooses the next action greedily or by stochastic sampling, according to this distribution. 

4. Methodology 

In this section, we present the architecture of our ap-proach and important methodological details. We first present an overview of our model, including the FiLM mechanism and the rationale behind it. Then, we present the components of our training regimen, including the CL strategy and the PO algorithm. 

A. Corrêa et al. Page 5 of 22 FiLMMeD: Feature-wise Linear Modulation for Cross-Problem MDVRP 

4.1. FiLMMeD architecture 

FiLMMeD follows the general encoder-decoder archi-tecture of previous Transformer-based MTL models (Liu et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2024a). In this work, we ap-ply FiLMMeD modifications into three base architectures: FiLMMeD-MTPOMO, FiLMMeD-MVMoE, and FiLMMeD-CaDA. To streamline the description, we primarily use MTPOMO and MVMoE as references since they share a similar model pipeline. For specific architectural details regarding the FiLMMeD-CaDA model, we refer readers to Li et al. (2025). We note, however, that the FiLM mechanism is integrated into CaDA in the exact same manner described for the other models. Furthermore, our core contributions remain modular, i.e., they can be seamlessly adapted to a wide variety of other neural-based MTL architectures. 

4.1.1. Encoder 

The encoder starts by processing a given MDVRP in-stance . First, linear layers are used to project the static features of each node in the instance onto a 𝑑 -dimensional embedding space. Each depot node 𝑣 𝑗 ∈ 𝑑 , ∀𝑗 ∈ {0 , ..., 𝑚 −1} is characterized by its two-dimensional coordinates. The features of each customer node 𝑣 𝑖 ∈ 𝑐 , ∀𝑖 ∈ { 𝑚, ..., 𝑚 +

𝑛 − 1} include the two-dimensional coordinates, demand, early and late time windows, and service time. Let ℎ(𝑑 ) 

> 𝑗

and 

ℎ(𝑐 ) 

> 𝑖

denote the initial embeddings of depot and customers nodes, respectively. First, two separate linear layers are used to process each set of features from depots and customers, as follows: 

ℎ(𝑑 ) 

> 𝑗

= 𝑊 0𝑥 (𝑑 ) 

> 𝑣 𝑗

+ 𝑏 0, ∀𝑣 𝑗 ∈ 𝑑 (1) 

ℎ(𝑐 ) 

> 𝑖

= 𝑊 1𝑥 (𝑐 ) 

> 𝑣 𝑖

+ 𝑏 1, ∀𝑣 𝑖 ∈ 𝑐 (2) where 𝑥 (𝑑 ) 

> 𝑣 𝑗

∈ ℝ2 denotes the feature vector of depot 𝑣 𝑗 ,

𝑥 (𝑐 ) 

> 𝑣 𝑖

∈ ℝ6 denotes the feature vector of customer 𝑣 𝑖 , 𝑊 0 ∈

ℝ𝑑 ×2 and 𝑊 1 ∈ ℝ𝑑 ×6 are learnable weight matrices, and 

𝑏 0, 𝑏 1 ∈ ℝ𝑑 are bias vectors. After that, we modulate the customer embeddings using FiLM (Perez et al., 2018). FiLM is a conditioning tech-nique that allows a neural network to conditionally modify an embedding based on external information. Here, each customer embedding ℎ(𝑐 ) 

> 𝑖

is explicitly modulated according to a Boolean conditioning vector 𝑧 ∈ ℝ5, which indicates the active constraints in the input instance, that is, whether an instance contains B, L, O, TW or I attributes. More specifically, FiLM computes feature-wise scaling ( 𝛾 ) and feature-wise shifting ( 𝛽 ) parameters based on the condition-ing vector: 

𝛾 = 𝑓 𝛾 (𝑧 ) ∈ ℝ𝑑 , 𝛽 = 𝑓 𝛽 (𝑧 ) ∈ ℝ𝑑 (3) where 𝑓 𝛾 and 𝑓 𝛽 are learnable linear projections. Each customer embedding is then modulated as an affine transformation: 

𝐹 𝑖𝐿𝑀 (ℎ(𝑐 ) 

> 𝑖

|𝛾, 𝛽 ) = 𝛾ℎ (𝑐 ) 

> 𝑖

+ 𝛽. (4) Here, 𝛾 serves a scaling parameter that controls the importance of each node in response to the conditioning vector. For example, if time windows are active, 𝛾 might emphasize the embedding channels related to early and late time windows, making the model more sensitive to time windows constraints during subsequent transformations. 𝛽 

acts as a bias parameter that shifts each embedding by an offset determined by the active set of constraints. This allows the model to adapt the learned representations of each node based on its context, instead of treating all embeddings identically regardless of the variant solved. After that, the result embeddings are concatenated with the previously processed depot embeddings, resulting in 

ℎ(0)  

> 𝑖

, ∀𝑣 𝑖 ∈ . This sequence is then processed by 𝐿 encoder layers. Each layer 𝓁 ∈ {1 , … , 𝐿 } consists of an MHA sub-layer followed by a node-wise Feed-Forward Network (FFN), with residual connections and Instance Normaliza-tion (IN) before and after the FFN. In the MHA sub-layer with 𝐴 heads, for each node 𝑣 𝑖 and head 𝑎 ∈ {1 , … , 𝐴 }, we compute query ( 𝑄 ), key ( 𝐾 ), and value ( 𝑉 ) vectors: 

𝑄 (𝓁 ,𝑎 ) 

> 𝑖

= 𝑊 (𝓁 ,𝑎 ) 

> 𝑄

ℎ(𝓁 −1)  

> 𝑖

(5) 

𝐾 (𝓁 ,𝑎 ) 

> 𝑖

= 𝑊 (𝓁 ,𝑎 ) 

> 𝐾

ℎ(𝓁 −1)  

> 𝑖

(6) 

𝑉 (𝓁 ,𝑎 ) 

> 𝑖

= 𝑊 (𝓁 ,𝑎 ) 

> 𝑉

ℎ(𝓁 −1)  

> 𝑖

(7) where 𝑊 (𝓁 ,𝑎 ) 

> 𝑄

, 𝑊 (𝓁 ,𝑎 ) 

> 𝐾

, 𝑊 (𝓁 ,𝑎 )𝑉 ∈ ℝ𝑑 𝑘 ×𝑑 are learnable pro-jection matrices, and 𝑑 𝑘 = 𝑑 ∕𝐴 .The attention weight between nodes 𝑣 𝑖 and 𝑣 𝑗 is com-puted as: 

𝑤 (𝓁 ,𝑎 ) 

> 𝑖𝑗

= Softmax 

⎛⎜⎜⎝

(𝑄 (𝓁 ,𝑎 ) 

> 𝑖

)⊤𝐾 (𝓁 ,𝑎 )

> 𝑗

√𝑑 𝑘 

⎞⎟⎟⎠

. (8) This weight represents the influence of node 𝑣 𝑗 on node 

𝑣 𝑖 within the 𝑎 -th head. The output of head 𝑎 for node 𝑣 𝑖 is a weighted sum of values: 𝑜 (𝓁 ,𝑎 ) 

> 𝑖

= ∑𝑣 𝑘 ∈ 𝑤 (𝓁 ,𝑎 ) 

> 𝑖𝑘

𝑉 (𝓁 ,𝑎 ) 

> 𝑘

. The outputs from all heads are concatenated and projected: MHA (ℎ(𝓁 −1)  

> 𝑖

) = 𝑊 𝑂 

[

𝑜 (𝓁 ,1)  

> 𝑖

, … , 𝑜 (𝓁 ,𝐴 )

> 𝑖

]

(9) where 𝑊 𝑂 ∈ ℝ𝑑 ×𝑑 .The MHA output is then processed by the first residual and normalization block: ̃ℎ(𝓁 ) 

> 𝑖

= IN 

(

ℎ(𝓁 −1)  

> 𝑖

+ MHA (ℎ(𝓁 −1)  

> 𝑖

)

)

(10) Finally, the standard FFN is applied, followed by a second residual and normalization block to produce the layer output: 

ℎ(𝓁 ) 

> 𝑖

= IN 

(̃ℎ(𝓁 ) 

> 𝑖

+ FFN (̃ ℎ(𝓁 ) 

> 𝑖

)

)

(11)  

> A. Corrêa et al. Page 6 of 22 FiLMMeD: Feature-wise Linear Modulation for Cross-Problem MDVRP

The FFN consists of two linear transformations with a ReLU activation in between. The description above details the en-coder of FiLMMeD-MTPOMO. For FiLMMeD-MVMoE, the only change is that the standard FFN layer is replaced by a mixture-of-experts layer (Zhou et al., 2024a). 

4.1.2. Decoder 

After the encoding process, the decoder operates on the final node embeddings {ℎ(𝐿 ) 

> 𝑖

}𝑚 +𝑛 −1  

> 𝑖 =0

produced by the encoder. Like prior MTL architectures, we adopt a heavy encoder and light decoder structure, consisting of 6 encoder layers and a single decoder layer (Liu et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2024a; Berto et al., 2025). Since the encoder runs only once per instance and the decoder relies on a single MHA module for repeated steps, this design ensures computational efficiency. First, the decoder utilizes its own set of learnable projec-tions to compute keys and values based on the encoded node embeddings, which remain static throughout the decoding process: 

𝐾 𝑑𝑒𝑐 𝑖 = 𝑊 𝑑𝑒𝑐 𝐾 ℎ(𝐿 ) 

> 𝑖

, 𝑉 𝑑𝑒𝑐 𝑖 = 𝑊 𝑑𝑒𝑐 𝑉 ℎ(𝐿 ) 

> 𝑖

, ∀𝑣 𝑖 ∈  (12) where 𝑊 𝑑𝑒𝑐 𝐾 , 𝑊 𝑑𝑒𝑐 𝑉 ∈ ℝ𝑑 ×𝑑 .At each decoding step 𝑡 , a context feature vector is constructed from the embedding of the previously selected node and the current state variables. The state variables include the vehicle’s remaining capacity, the elapsed time, current route length, and Boolean indicators on the presence of open and inter-depot routes. This vector is projected to form the dynamic query 𝑄 𝑑𝑒𝑐  

> (𝑡 )

:

𝑄 𝑑𝑒𝑐  

> (𝑡 )

= 𝑊 𝑑𝑒𝑐 𝑄 Concat (ℎ(𝐿 ) 

> 𝜏 𝑡 −1

, 𝐶 𝑡 , 𝑇 𝑡 , 𝐷 𝑡 , 𝑜 𝑡 , 𝑖𝑑 𝑡 ), (13) where ℎ(𝐿 ) 

> 𝜏 𝑡 −1

denotes the embedding of the previously se-lected node. Then, an MHA mechanism is employed. The query 𝑄 𝑑𝑒𝑐 

> (𝑡 )

attends to the static keys 𝐾 𝑑𝑒𝑐 𝑖 to aggregate the values 𝑉 𝑑𝑒𝑐 𝑖 ,producing an updated context vector ℎ′𝑡 𝑐 . Any infeasible node 

𝑣 𝑗 has its attention score set to −∞ . Finally, we compute the compatibility score 𝑢 𝑖 for each node 𝑣 𝑖 using a single-head attention mechanism. This step uses the updated context vector ℎ′𝑡 𝑐 as the query and the original encoder embeddings 

ℎ(𝐿 ) 

> 𝑖

as the keys: 

𝑢 𝑖 =

⎧⎪⎨⎪⎩

𝜉 ⋅ tanh 

( (ℎ′𝑡 𝑐 )𝑇 ℎ(𝐿 )

> 𝑖
> √𝑑 𝑘

)

, if 𝑣 𝑖 ∈ 𝑡 ,

−∞ , otherwise. (14) Here, 𝑑 𝑘 = 𝑑 ∕𝐴 (with 𝐴 being the number of heads), and 𝜉 is a clipping parameter set to 10 (Bello et al., 2017). Similar to the MHA step, we mask the compatibilities of infeasible nodes by setting 𝑢 𝑖 = −∞ . Finally, the probability of selecting node 𝑣 𝑖 at step 𝑡 is computed via the Softmax function: 

𝑝 𝑖 = Softmax (𝑢 𝑖 ) = 𝑒 𝑢 𝑖 

∑𝑗 𝑒 𝑢 𝑗 (15) During inference, the nodes are always selected greedily (that is, argmax 𝑖 𝑝 𝑖 ), while during training, they are selected by sampling from the generated distribution. 

4.2. Theoretical motivation behind FiLM 

Next, we provide theoretical arguments for why FiLM conditioning may improve policy learning and generaliza-tion across heterogeneous variants. Our analysis centers across two key aspects: 1) the gradient conflicts problem in MTL; 2) compositional generalization. 

Gradient conflict mitigation: When training a unified model across multiple (MD)VRP variants, the primary chal-lenge lies in gradient interference (Yu et al., 2020). Es-sentially, different tasks (in our case, different constraints) induce distinct loss landscapes. For instance,the gradients for variants with time windows, backhauls and open routes generally exhibit a low cosine similarity. Without proper conditioning, gradients from variant 𝐴 may destructively interfere with those from variant 𝐵 , leading to performance degradation on both, or one of them performing better in detriment of the other. Formally, let  denote the set of variants and 𝜒 (𝜃 )

the loss for variant 𝜒 ∈  . Standard MTL suffers from conflicting updates when ⟨∇𝜃 𝜒 1 , ∇𝜃 𝜒 2 ⟩ < 0 for 𝜒 1 ≠ 𝜒 2.FiLM can alleviate this issue by introducing task-specific affine modulations (𝛾 𝜒 , 𝛽 𝜒 ) applied to node’ representations. These modulations condition the forward pass, allowing different variants to induce distinct feature transformations before gradients are computed. As a result, variant-specific signals can be partially absorbed by the FiLM parameters, reducing the pressure on shared weights to accommodate conflicting objectives. While this mechanism does not eliminate gradient con-flicts in the shared parameters, it provides a lightweight pathway for task-specific adaptation, enhancing stability and generalization without fully separating the model into dis-tinct experts, which is computationally prohibitive. 

Compositional generalization: Another theoretical ad-vantage of FiLM is its ability to generalize to unseen con-straint combinations. By factorizing the conditioning vector 

𝑧 into independent constraint indicators, the model learns constraint-specific transformations that compose via super-position. This is similar to what hypernetworks do (Ha et al., 2017), where the adaptation parameters for a new task are generated by a meta-network rather than learned directly. When encountering a novel combination for the first time, the model can approximate the optimal transformation by interpolating between the learned transformations for each active constraint. 

4.3. Training 

4.3.1. Curriculum learning 

CL is a training strategy in which the model is ex-posed to tasks of progressively increasing complexity. By first learning to solve simpler problems, the model acquires fundamental patterns that can later be extended and refined as the task complexity increases. In the context of our work,  

> A. Corrêa et al. Page 7 of 22 FiLMMeD: Feature-wise Linear Modulation for Cross-Problem MDVRP

complexity is determined by the number and combination of active constraints in each MDVRP instance. We implement CL by progressively expanding the set of variants from which the model learns during training. In the beginning, the curriculum is dominated by single-constraint problems, allowing the model to learn the effect of each constraint in isolation. Concretely, during the first 30% of epochs, each batch is sampled from one of the following variants: MDVRP, MDOVRP, MDVRPB, MDVRPL, MD-VRPTW, MDVRPI, MDOVRPTW, MDVRPBTW, MDVR-PITW. While most of the variants available during the ini-tial phase of the curriculum are single-constraint, we also include three two-constraint variants with time windows (MDOVRPTW, MDVRPBTW, and MDVRPITW). This choice is not arbitrary, but motivated by empirical observa-tions specific to the multi-depot setting: learning solely from variants with a single constraint (like MTPOMO (Liu et al., 2024)), led to poor convergence on several MDVRP variants. In particular, variants involving backhauls, open routes, or inter-depot routes showed a very slow convergence, and was further exacerbated when paired with time windows, which strongly interact with other constraints. While typical training strategies have proven effective for single-depot cases (Zhou et al., 2024a; Berto et al., 2025), we found they achieved sub-par generalization for the MDVRP. More discussion on this issue is provided in Section 5.4.1. After this initial phase, we expand the curriculum, with all remaining two-constraint variants being introduced next. At 60% of total training epochs, we add the full set of three-constraint variants, and finally, at 90%, the remaining ones. As demonstrated in our ablation studies, this strategy proved to improve convergence, and ultimately, generaliza-tion across the tested MDVRP variants. To train our model, we employ the REINFORCE al-gorithm with shared baselines (Kwon et al., 2020), an RL method designed specifically for CO problems. A descrip-tion of this algorithm is provided next. 

4.3.2. REINFORCE with shared baselines 

To train the MDVRP models of FiLMMeD, like most neural-based VRP works, we employ the REINFORCE with shared baselines algorithm (Kwon et al., 2020). Each epoch comprises 100,000 instances, which are sampled in batches of size 𝐵 . For each instance 𝑖 , ∀𝑖 ∈ {1 , ..., 𝐵 }, the decoder generates 𝑁 trajectories {𝜏 1 

> 𝑖

, … , 𝜏 𝑁 𝑖 }. This is achieved by enforcing diverse starting nodes for each trajectory, allowing the model to broadly explore the solution space in a compu-tationally efficient manner. By generating multiple parallel rollouts, a low-variance baseline 𝑏 𝑖 can be calculated for each instance 𝑖 , as the average reward of all its 𝑁 generated trajectories: 

𝑏 𝑖 = 1

𝑁 

> 𝑁

∑

> 𝑗 =1

𝑅 (𝜏 𝑗 𝑖 , 𝑖 ). (16) Then, the policy gradient ∇𝜃 𝐽 (𝜃 ) is approximated using the advantage of each trajectory relative to this shared base-line: 

∇𝜃 𝐽 (𝜃 ) ≈ 1

𝐵𝑁 

> 𝐵

∑

> 𝑖 =1
> 𝑁

∑

> 𝑗 =1

(

𝑅 (𝜏 𝑗 𝑖 , 𝑖 ) − 𝑏 𝑖 

)

∇𝜃 log 𝑝 𝜃 (𝜏 𝑗 𝑖 |𝑖 ).

(17) Finally, the model parameters 𝜃 are updated via gradient ascent, with a learning rate 𝜂 .During training, we set the number of parallel trajec-tories to 𝑁 = 𝑚 + 𝑛 − 1 (Li et al., 2024; Corrêa et al., 2026). This results in 𝑁 = 52 for 50-node instances and 

𝑁 = 102 for 100-node instances, since we consider 3 depots. The set of starting nodes includes the last two depots (i.e., depots with indexes 1 and 2) and all available customers. For trajectories starting at a customer node, the vehicle is assumed to depart from the first depot (depot with index 0). This approach allows us to cover a wide range of initial solutions without incurring the computational burden of enumerating all possible starting nodes ( 3 × 50 = 150 ). We note that this choice does not impose any structural biases on the final solution, since the model can choose any other depot to anchor subsequent routes during the decoding process. 

4.3.3. Preference optimization 

Although FiLMMeD is primarily designed for MDVRP variants, we do not wish to neglect single-depot VRPs, which constitute a large portion of practical routing prob-lems and remain widely used benchmarks. Therefore, we fine-tune the MDVRP-pre-trained model on 16 single-depot VRPs previously explored in MTL research (Zhou et al., 2024a). Importantly, we employ PO instead of RL for this fine-tuning stage. We also train additional single-depot mod-els from scratch using PO, under the same experimental settings as Berto et al. (2025). Our choice for pre-training MDVRP models using RE-INFORCE rather than PO was to ensure a fairer assessment against established baselines – namely, REINFORCE itself and the uniform single-constraint sampling, opposed to our CL strategy. This baseline comparison allowed us to validate FiLMMeD’s architectural innovations, that is, FiLM and CL, without introducing confounding effects from a different training paradigm. Nevertheless, we did perform ablation studies on pre-training MDVRP models with PO, which sig-nificantly outperformed its REINFORCE counterpart (see Section 5.4.2). Besides solving single-depot problems, this design choice serves a broader purpose. While PO has recently shown improved generalization and sample efficiency (Pan et al., 2025a), its application has been largely limited to non-MTL domains. Our results suggest that PO is not merely a viable alternative to REINFORCE, but a more principled training paradigm for MTL, addressing several of its fundamental limitations. We also demonstrated its broad applicability across a variety of different model architectures, with PO outperforming RL on every occasion (see Section 5.8).  

> A. Corrêa et al. Page 8 of 22

FiLMMeD: Feature-wise Linear Modulation for Cross-Problem MDVRP 

In summary, PO replaces typical numeric rewards with pairwise preferences between candidate solutions. Instead of learning from scalar rewards, the model is optimized from qualitative comparisons, that is, whether one solution is better than another according to a given objective. This approach stabilizes learning, mitigating issues related to di-minishing reward signals and promoting a better exploration of the solution search space. Concretely, at each batch, we randomly select 𝐵 in-stances from one of the 16 single-depot VRP variants (see Table 2 for a full list of variants). For each instance 𝑖 , ∀𝑖 ∈{1 , ..., 𝐵 }, we generate 𝑁 solutions (setting again 𝑁 )𝑚 +𝑛 −1) and compute their ground-truth rewards 𝑟 𝑖 

> 1

, ..., 𝑟 𝑖 𝑁 . These rewards induce conflict-free preference labels, that is, solu-tion 𝑗 is preferred over solution 𝑘 whenever 𝑟 𝑗 > 𝑟 𝑘 . Within each instance, we compute all possible preference label pairs by comparing every solution against every other one. Here, 

𝑦 𝑖 𝑗,𝑘 denotes the preference label between solutions 𝑗 and 𝑘 

which is equal to 1 if 𝑟 𝑖 𝑗 > 𝑟 𝑖 𝑘 , and 0 if not. For each solution 𝑗 , the log-probabilities of the se-lected actions across the trajectory are accumulated, giving log 𝜋 𝜃 (𝜏 𝑖 𝑗 ). The difference of log-probabilities between solu-tions 𝑗 and 𝑘 is then mapped into a preference probability: 

𝑝 𝜃 (𝜏 𝑖 𝑗 ≻ 𝜏 𝑖 𝑘 ) = 𝜎 (𝛼 (log 𝜋 𝜃 (𝜏 𝑖 𝑗 ) − log 𝜋 𝜃 (𝜏 𝑖 𝑘 ))) (18) where 𝛼 is an entropy regularization parameter and 𝜎 is a Sigmoid function. The PO loss is then defined as the negative log-likelihood of the observed preferences within all instances and pairs: 

PO = − 1

𝐵𝑁 2

> 𝐵

∑

> 𝑖 =1
> 𝑁

∑

> 𝑗 =1 , 𝑘 =1

𝑦 𝑖 𝑗,𝑘 log 𝑝 𝜃 (𝜏 𝑖 𝑗 ≻ 𝜏 𝑖 𝑘 ) (19) Intuitively, this loss pushes the policy to assign greater prob-abilities to preferred trajectories relative to other solutions within the same instance. Our implementation follows the same algorithm proposed by Pan et al. (2025a), adapted for the MTL setting. 

Why PO for Multi-task Learning? One of the most crucial challenges for the application of MTL in CO lies in the gradient interference across different tasks. Simply put, different VRP variants induce conflicting parameter updates due to heterogeneous constraint structures. In this regard, we identify that PO holds several theoretical advantages over RL: 

Variance reduction and scale invariance: The REIN-FORCE with shared baselines algorithm, commonly used in neural-based CO works, relies on the gradient estimator 

∇𝜃 𝐽 = 𝔼 [( 𝑅 (𝜏, ) − 𝑏 )∇ 𝜃 log 𝑝 𝜃 (𝜏, )] , where variance scales with the absolute variance of tour lengths across instances. In MTL, this is especially problematic, since dif-ferent tasks typically have much different reward scales. For instance, the average costs for variants with time windows are generally much larger than variants without, causing high-cost instances to dominate gradients and implicitly 

Table 2 

16 VRP variants with four constraints. Open Route (O) Backhaul (B) Duration Limit (L) Time Window (TW) CVRP OVRP ✓                               

> VRPB ✓
> VRPL ✓
> VRPTW ✓
> OVRPTW ✓✓
> OVRPB ✓✓
> OVRPL ✓✓
> VRPBL ✓✓
> VRPBTW ✓✓
> VRPLTW ✓✓
> OVRPBL ✓✓✓
> OVRPBTW ✓✓✓
> OVRPLTW ✓✓✓
> VRPBLTW ✓✓✓
> OVRPBLTW ✓✓✓✓

prioritize certain tasks over others. In contrast, PO optimizes the Bradley-Terry objective PO , which depends only on 

relative tour rankings within a single instance. Since prefer-ences 𝟙 [𝑅 (𝜏 𝑗 , ) > 𝑅 (𝜏 𝑘 , )] are strictly invariant to reward scaling, PO ensures a much more stable learning. We verified this empirically by measuring gradients across multiple training batches. PO reduced per-parameter gradient variance by over 2000 times (from 2.33 × 10 −6 to 

1.09 × 10 −9 ) and overall gradient magnitude by 72 times (from 1.00 to 1.39 × 10 −2 ), while maintaining comparable signal-to-noise ratios ( ∼ 1478 vs 971 ). PO’s lower gradient magnitude may enable a more tolerant learning process with respect to gradient interference, as smaller updates mitigate conflicting tasks from violently overwriting each other’s parameters. 

𝑂 (𝑁 2) supervision density: For each instance 𝑖 , RE-INFORCE extracts 𝑁 scalar signals {𝑅 (𝜏 𝑗 𝑖 , 𝑖 ) − 𝑏 𝑖 }𝑁 𝑗 =1 ,discarding information when multiple trajectories are near-optimal and the policy converges (i.e., advantages ≈ 0). Conversely, PO computes (𝑁 

> 2

) pairwise comparisons from each instance, providing a much denser credit assignment than REINFORCE, allowing it to extract more information from the same trajectories, leading to a faster convergence and lower performance gaps. 

5. Experiments 

In this section, we validate the effectiveness of the pro-posed method through a series of experiments. We evaluate FiLMMeD on 24 MDVRP variants and 16 single-depot VRPs. We also conduct various ablation studies to measure the impact of all proposed contributions. 

Baselines: MDVRP variants: For traditional solvers, we use PyVRP (Wouda et al., 2024), a highly versatile hybrid genetic search (HGS) algorithm capable of solving all 24 MDVRP variants. We solve instances with 50 and 100 nodes, running PyVRP for 20 and 40 seconds per instance, respectively. Additionally, we report results using ten times the computational budget (200 and 400 seconds 

A. Corrêa et al. Page 9 of 22 FiLMMeD: Feature-wise Linear Modulation for Cross-Problem MDVRP 

per instance). Following prior work, we parallelized PyVRP across 32 CPU cores (Zhou et al., 2024a). All PyVRP default hyper-parameters were kept. For neural-based methods, we compare our method against MTPOMO (Liu et al., 2024) and MVMoE (Zhou et al., 2024a). We consider two ver-sions of FiLMMeD, which incorporate our proposed con-tributions on top of MTPOMO and MVMoE, labeled as 

FiLMMeD-MTPOMO and FiLMMeD-MVMoE in the re-sults. VRP variants: For single-depot VRPs, we evaluate FiLMMeD against two different experimental configura-tions: 1) those defined by Zhou et al. (2024a) (FiLMMeD-MTPOMO and FiLMMeD-MVMoE); 2) those defined by Berto et al. (2025) (labeled as FiLMMeD-CaDA , incorpo-rating our contributions on top of CaDA). 

Training: Each neural-based model was trained for 300 epochs, with each epoch consisting of 100,000 MD-VRP instances generated on the fly. Separate models were trained for 50-node and 100-node instances, with a batch size of 128 and 64 for each instance size. Each batch contains instances from a randomly selected MDVRP in-stance. MTPOMO and MVMoE were trained with the same hyper-parameters as in their original works, while the remaining hyper-parameters for FiLMMeD-MTPOMO and FiLMMeD-MVMoE are listed in Table 3. For the fine-tuning phase (applicable only to single-depot VRPs following the Zhou et al. (2024a) experimentel setting), the FiLMMeD models pre-trained on MDVRP variants were further trained for 300 epochs using the PO algorithm described in Section 4.3.3 (with a random single-depot VRP variant sampled in each batch). During this phase, we observed no significant difference in the computational time per epoch compared to the traditional RL-based training. In contrast, for the Berto et al. (2025) experimental setting, we trained FiLMMeD-CaDA from scratch for 300 epochs, using the same hyper-parameters and configurations as Li et al. (2025). Unlike FiLMMeD-MTPOMO and FiLMMeD-MVMoE, FiLMMeD-CaDA was not fine-tuned from a pre-trained MDVRP model, since the models reported by Zhou et al. (2024a) were trained on 100M instances, while the ones evaluated under the settings of Berto et al. (2025) were trained on only 30M instances. This ensures a fairer comparison. Had we fine-tuned FiLMMeD-CaDA from a pre-trained MDVRP model (which itself was trained over 30M instances), the total training exposure (60M instances) would have been double that of the baselines. 

Inference: Across all neural-based models, we em-ployed a greedy decoding combined with the multiple starting nodes strategy and the ×8 instance augmentation technique proposed by (Kwon et al., 2020). For each MD-VRP variant, we generated two testing datasets, each con-taining 1,000 instances with 50 and 100 nodes and 3 depots (see Section 5.1 for the instance generation procedure). For single-depot VRPs in the Zhou et al. (2024a) setting (Table 5), we used the same testing datasets as in (Zhou et al., 2024a). For the Berto et al. (2025) setting (Table 9), we followed their respective experimental protocols. On single-depot problems, we used 50 and 100 starting nodes for the 50- and 100-node instances, respectively. On MDVRP variants, we increased this to 150 and 300 starting nodes to enumerate all possible initial depot-customer assignments (given that each instance contains 3 depots). We report the average objective values across each dataset ( Obj. ), the average gap ( Gap ) relative to the best non-neural baseline, and the computational time ( Time ) required to solve all 1,000 instances. The best performing non-neural baseline is indicated with *. 

Hardware: Non-neural baselines were run on a ma-chine with 32 GB of RAM and an Intel Core i9-13900. Neural-based models were executed on a machine with 45GB of RAM, an Intel Xeon Gold 5315Y and an Nvidia RTX A4000. We note that we compare some results against those reported in prior works (Zhou et al., 2024a; Li et al., 2025), which utilized faster GPUs. This hardware asym-metry explains some inference time discrepancies, and not architectural overhead introduced by our contributions (see Section 5.9 for more details). 

5.1. Instance generation 

In this section, we describe the data generation process we followed for the MDVRP instances of each constraint type. Across all variants, the node coordinates for both customers and depots are randomly sampled from a uniform distribution 𝑈 (0 , 1) . We recall that for single-depot VRPs, we used the same datasets and instance generation processes as Zhou et al. (2024a) and Berto et al. (2025). 

Vehicle capacity (C): Vehicle capacity is a constraint implicitly present in all variants considered in this work; therefore, we do not list it as a separate constraint type in Ta-bles 1 and 2. For this constraint, we adopt the standard setup used in prior routing works (Kool et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2024a). The demand 𝛿 𝑖 for each customer node 𝑣 𝑖 ∈ 𝑐 is an integer sampled from the uniform distribution 𝑈 (1 , 2, ..., 9) .The vehicle capacity 𝐶 is set to 40, for instances with 𝑛 = 50 ,and to 50 for instances with 𝑛 = 100 . Finally, the demand of each node is normalized by dividing it by 𝐶 . The masking mechanism prevents the model from selecting nodes whose demand exceeds the vehicle’s remaining capacity and also masks out nodes that have already been served. 

Open route (O): This constraint does not require any additional data to be generated. When active, it is repre-sented simply as a Boolean flag 𝑜 𝑡 in the context vector. For instances that simultaneously include both open routes and route length limit constraints, we follow the standard convention: because vehicles are not required to return to their departure depots, the final leg from the vehicle’s last visited customer back to the depot is excluded from the route-length calculation. Likewise, for instances with both open routes and time windows, the depot’s closing time 

𝑙 𝑖 imposes no restrictions to vehicles, since they are not required to return. We do not combine open routes with inter-depot routes in our MDVRP variants. The reason is that one would essentially contradict the other. Inter-depot routes allow vehicles to return to other depots to replenish their original capacity, whereas open routes explicitly remove the                                                     

> A. Corrêa et al. Page 10 of 22 FiLMMeD: Feature-wise Linear Modulation for Cross-Problem MDVRP
> Table 3
> Hyperparameters used by FiLMMeD-MTPOMO and FiLMMeD-MVMoE.
> Hyperparameter Value Model
> Embedding dimension
> 𝑑 ℎ
> 128 Number of attention heads 𝐴
> 8Number of encoder lay-ers 𝐿
> 6Feedforward hidden di-mension 𝑑 𝑎
> 512 Tanh clipping 𝜉 10.0
> Training
> Batch size 128 (for 𝑛 = 50 ) and 64 (for
> 𝑛 = 100 )Instances per epoch 100,000 Optimizer Adam Learning rate (LR) 1 × 10 −4
> Weight decay 1 × 10 −6
> Training epochs 300
> Fine-tuning
> Batch size 128 (for 𝑛 = 50 ) and 64 (for
> 𝑛 = 100 )Learning rate 3 × 10 −4
> Weight decay 1 × 10 −6
> LR scheduler MultiStepLR LR milestones [270, 295] LR gamma 0.1 Number of fine-tuning epochs 300 Optimizer Adam
> 𝛼 0.03
> Inference
> Number of POMO start-ing nodes (MDVRP) 150 for 𝑛 =50 and 300 for
> 𝑛 = 100
> Number of POMO start-ing nodes (VRP) 50 for 𝑛 = 50 and 100 for 𝑛 =100
> Instance augmentation ×8 , following Kwon et al. Kwon et al. (2020)

requirement to return to the depots at the end of service. For this reason, we treat these two as mutually exclusive. 

Route length limit (L): To generate route length limits, we follow an approach similar to Berto et al. (2025). We begin by computing the Euclidean distance between every depot-customer pair. The largest of these distances provides a natural lower bound on the maximum route length 𝐷 ,ensuring that any vehicle can reach any customer from its depot and return. Doubling this value produces a lower-bound estimate on the distance a vehicle would need to travel to visit that customer and return to its depot. We then sample 

𝐷 from a uniform distribution between this value and 3.0. During decoding, the masking mechanism restricts vehicles to serving only those customers for which the current route length – plus the cost of visiting the customer and returning to the depot – remains below 𝐷 . Again, when routes are open, the return distance to the depot is omitted from this calculation. 

Backhaul (B): Following prior work (Liu et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2024a), we randomly designate 20% of customer nodes as backhaul customers – i.e., 10 nodes when 𝑛 = 50 

and 20 nodes when 𝑛 = 100 . During a route, the vehicle’s current capacity throughout a route must never exceed 𝐶 

at any time. Consequently, during decoding, any backhaul customer whose 𝛿 𝑖 would cause the vehicle to exceed its maximum capacity 𝐶 is masked out. 

Time window (TW): For time windows, we follow the procedure of Berto et al. (2025). If a vehicle arrives at a customer whose time window has not started yet, it must wait until 𝑒 𝑖 to start service. Each depot also has an end time win-dow, at which point all vehicles must have returned (when open routes are not present). During decoding, customers whose vehicles cannot complete service before the late time window 𝑙 𝑖 are masked out. 

Inter-depot routes (I): Like open routes, inter-depot routes do not require extra data generation. A Boolean 𝑖𝑑 𝑡 in the context vector indicates the presence of this constraint. 

5.2. Main MDVRP results 

Our main results on the 24 MDVRP variants are shown in Table 4. Both FiLMMeD-MTPOMO and FiLMMeD-MVMoE consistently outperform its respective neural base-lines ( MTPOMO and MVMoE ) across the majority of datasets, obtaining lower average solution costs and perfor-mance gaps. On 50-node instances, FiLMMeD-MTPOMO reached an average gap of 4.717%, improving over its baseline by 2.888%, while FiLMMeD-MVMoE achieved 4.740%, outperforming MVMoE by 1.847%. On 100-node instances, FiLMMeD-MTPOMO and FiLMMeD-MVMoE averaged 6.847% and 6.433%, outperforming their coun-terparts by 1.921% and 5.288%, respectively. These results indicate the effectiveness of the proposed FiLM mechanism in the encoder, as well as the CL training strategy. 

5.3. Results on single-depot variants (Zhou et al. (2024a) setting) 

The main results on single-depot VRPs are shown in Ta-ble 5. Overall FiLMMeD achieves competitive performance relative to its baselines. While no single model consistently prevails across all variants, FiLMMeD remains highly com-petitive in all settings. Specifically, on 50-node instances FiLMMeD-MTPOMO achieves an average gap of 4.138%, compared to 4.602% for MTPOMO, while FiLMMeD-MVMoE reaches 4.081% versus 4.352% for MVMoE. On 100-node datasets, FiLMMeD-MTPOMO obtained an av-erage gap of 4.099% (versus 4.969% from MTPOMO), and FiLMMeD-MVMoE 4.045% (against 4.595% from MVMoE). Importantly, we recall that while the baselines MT-POMO and MVMoE were trained for 100M instances (5000 epochs with 20,000 instances each), FiLMMeD was fine-tuned on 30M instances (300 epochs with 100,000 instances each). Even when accounting the pre-training phase on the  

> A. Corrêa et al. Page 11 of 22

FiLMMeD: Feature-wise Linear Modulation for Cross-Problem MDVRP 

Table 4 

Testing results on 1K test instances of 24 MDVRPs. The best MTL results are shown in gray, and the models improved by our approach are underlined. 

Method 𝑛 = 50 𝑛 = 100 Method 𝑛 = 50 𝑛 = 100 

Obj. Gap Time Obj. Gap Time Obj. Gap Time Obj. Gap Time MDVRP  HGS-PyVRP 7.995 0.013% 10.4m 11.823 0.127% 20.8m MDOVRP  HGS-PyVRP 5.338 * 10.4m 7.960 0.026% 20.8m HGS-PyVRP (10x) 7.994 * 1.7h 11.808 * 3.5h HGS-PyVRP (10x) 5.338 * 1.7h 7.958 * 3.5h MTPOMO 8.212 2.712% 13s 12.294 4.117% 52s MTPOMO 5.562 4.166% 13s 8.404 5.573% 52s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 8.167 2.163% 13s 12.280 4.002% 49s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 5.474 2.522% 13s 8.375 5.207% 52s MVMoE/4E 8.207 2.661% 18s 12.129 2.726% 68s MVMoE/4E 5.503 3.071% 18s 8.390 5.401% 69s FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E 8.152 1.980% 18s 12.222 3.507% 69s FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E 5.468 2.411% 19s 8.334 4.696% 74s MDVRPB  HGS-PyVRP 7.348 0.017% 10.4m 10.645 0.169% 20.8m MDVRPL  HGS-PyVRP 8.008 0.009% 10.4m 11.820 0.140% 20.8m HGS-PyVRP (10x) 7.347 * 1.7h 10.627 * 3.5h HGS-PyVRP (10x) 8.007 * 1.7h 11.803 * 3.5h MTPOMO 7.618 3.688% 12s 11.203 5.436% 52s MTPOMO 8.225 2.708% 14s 12.288 4.103% 61s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 7.607 3.545% 12s 11.248 5.864% 48s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 8.184 2.202% 14s 12.280 4.039% 57s MVMoE/4E 7.588 3.280% 17s 11.225 5.647% 64s MVMoE/4E 8.222 2.669% 20s 12.126 2.735% 76s FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E 7.596 3.387% 17s 11.186 5.268% 64s FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E 8.171 2.040% 19s 12.220 3.535% 77s MDVRPTW  HGS-PyVRP 12.527 1.901% 10.4m 21.540 8.746% 20.8m MDOVRPTW  HGS-PyVRP 8.114 1.653% 10.4m 13.477 2.407% 20.8m HGS-PyVRP (10x) 12.269 * 1.7h 19.722 * 3.5h HGS-PyVRP (10x) 7.981 * 1.7h 13.143 * 3.5h MTPOMO 12.609 2.749% 17s 20.610 4.485% 75s MTPOMO 8.421 5.498% 17s 14.212 8.117% 75s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 12.550 2.277% 17s 20.577 4.323% 71s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 8.092 1.363% 19s 13.581 3.300% 77s MVMoE/4E 12.595 2.631% 23s 22.020 11.629% 97s MVMoE/4E 8.369 4.852% 24s 14.401 9.510% 98s FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E 12.565 2.401% 24s 20.533 4.101% 94s FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E 8.104 1.515% 26s 13.542 3.005% 102s MDOVRPB  HGS-PyVRP 5.194 * 10.4m 7.644 0.020% 20.8m MDOVRPL  HGS-PyVRP 5.334 0.001% 10.4m 7.982 0.032% 20.8m HGS-PyVRP (10x) 5.194 * 1.7h 7.642 * 3.5h HGS-PyVRP (10x) 5.334 * 1.7h 7.979 * 3.5h MTPOMO 5.774 11.149% 13s 8.482 10.951% 52s MTPOMO 5.561 4.225% 14s 8.432 5.651% 59s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 5.456 5.031% 14s 8.233 7.706% 52s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 5.469 2.501% 15s 8.399 5.243% 60s MVMoE/4E 5.605 7.888% 17s 8.504 11.234% 73s MVMoE/4E 5.501 3.112% 20s 8.411 5.389% 80s FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E 5.450 4.924% 19s 8.183 7.053% 70s FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E 5.467 2.473% 21s 8.358 4.724% 81s MDVRPBL  HGS-PyVRP 7.318 0.016% 10.4m 10.591 0.174% 20.8m MDVRPBTW  HGS-PyVRP 12.615 2.354% 10.4m 21.160 7.175% 20.8m HGS-PyVRP (10x) 7.316 * 1.7h 10.572 * 3.5h HGS-PyVRP (10x) 12.312 * 1.7h 19.680 * 3.5h MTPOMO 7.601 3.896% 14s 11.146 5.430% 60s MTPOMO 13.711 11.317% 17s 22.430 13.925% 76s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 7.587 3.709% 14s 11.202 5.956% 54s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 13.556 10.067% 17s 22.101 12.280% 70s MVMoE/4E 7.574 3.514% 18s 11.170 5.665% 71s MVMoE/4E 13.690 11.150% 23s 24.408 23.983% 96s FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E 7.579 3.593% 18s 11.126 5.239% 70s FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E 13.577 10.246% 23s 22.051 12.026% 90s MDVRPLTW  HGS-PyVRP 12.492 2.473 10.4m 21.083 7.192% 20.8m MDOVRPBL  HGS-PyVRP 5.187 * 10.4m 7.649 0.026% 20.8m HGS-PyVRP (10x) 12.167 * 1.7h 19.614 * 3.5h HGS-PyVRP (10x) 5.187 * 1.7h 7.647 * 3.5h MTPOMO 12.491 2.640% 18s 20.498 4.489% 85s MTPOMO 5.767 11.169% 13s 8.485 10.926% 58s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 12.443 2.249% 18s 20.479 4.394% 80s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 5.445 4.973% 15s 8.236 7.675% 58s MVMoE/4E 12.494 2.664% 25s 21.933 11.801% 106s MVMoE/4E 5.594 7.840% 18s 8.506 11.192% 77s FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E 12.461 2.388% 25s 20.441 4.196% 104s FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E 5.444 4.950% 20s 8.192 7.106% 75s MDOVRPBTW  HGS-PyVRP 8.172 2.379% 10.4m 13.274 1.445% 20.8m MDOVRPLTW  HGS-PyVRP 8.017 0.741% 10.4m 13.575 3.721% 20.8m HGS-PyVRP (10x) 7.975 * 1.7h 13.073 * 3.5h HGS-PyVRP (10x) 7.956 * 1.7h 13.063 * 3.5h MTPOMO 8.962 12.348% 17s 15.098 15.437% 77s MTPOMO 8.402 5.585% 18s 14.127 8.134% 83s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 8.627 8.147% 19s 14.420 10.269% 76s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 8.063 1.321% 20s 13.499 3.317% 85s MVMoE/4E 8.885 11.392% 23s 15.694 19.966% 103s MVMoE/4E 8.343 4.845% 24s 14.325 9.613% 111s FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E 8.635 8.244% 25s 14.384 9.991% 97s FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E 8.071 1.419% 27s 13.473 3.114% 111s MDVRPBLTW  HGS-PyVRP 13.006 5.951% 10.4m 20.904 6.073% 20.8m MDOVRPBLTW  HGS-PyVRP 8.153 2.249% 10.4m 13.506 3.749% 20.8m HGS-PyVRP (10x) 12.243 * 1.7h 19.643 * 3.5h HGS-PyVRP (10x) 7.968 * 1.7h 13.010 * 3.5h MTPOMO 13.624 11.262% 20s 22.389 13.949% 85s MTPOMO 8.952 12.293% 18s 15.035 15.543% 84s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 13.460 9.935% 19s 22.080 12.393% 78s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 8.612 8.052% 20s 14.353 10.312% 83s MVMoE/4E 13.602 11.090% 24s 24.342 23.904% 104s MVMoE/4E 8.890 11.523% 24s 15.585 19.746% 111s FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E 13.486 10.151% 24s 22.021 12.097% 99s FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E 8.627 8.230% 26s 14.315 10.020% 105s MDVRPI  HGS-PyVRP 7.930 0.677% 10.4m 11.895 2.159% 20.8m MDVRPIB  HGS-PyVRP 7.234 0.598% 10.4m 10.655 1.900% 20.8m HGS-PyVRP (10x) 7.876 * 1.7h 11.643 * 3.5h HGS-PyVRP (10x) 7.191 * 1.7h 10.456 * 3.5h MTPOMO 8.178 3.866% 14s 12.161 4.482% 55s MTPOMO 7.634 6.195% 15s 11.174 6.897% 56s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 8.173 3.797% 14s 12.236 5.131% 52s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 7.592 5.612% 13s 11.193 7.085% 51s MVMoE/4E 8.141 3.387% 19s 12.111 4.048% 73s MVMoE/4E 7.607 5.816% 19s 11.243 7.566% 71s FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E 8.168 3.742% 19s 12.181 4.652% 71s FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E 7.579 5.428% 18s 11.127 6.452% 67s MDVRPIL  HGS-PyVRP 7.972 0.681% 10.4m 11.938 2.234% 20.8m MDVRPITW  HGS-PyVRP 13.129 6.410% 10.4m 24.548 24.425% 20.8m HGS-PyVRP (10x) 7.918 * 1.7h 11.676 * 3.5h HGS-PyVRP (10x) 12.285 * 1.7h 19.597 * 3.5h MTPOMO 8.214 3.758% 14s 12.205 4.561% 62s MTPOMO 13.347 8.740% 24s 21.086 7.598% 97s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 8.211 3.722% 15s 12.274 5.164% 60s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 12.570 2.317% 18s 20.452 4.347% 75s MVMoE/4E 8.185 3.391% 20s 12.159 4.161% 81s MVMoE/4E 13.100 6.622% 29s 22.197 13.260% 110s FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E 8.203 3.627% 20s 12.215 4.652% 79s FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E 12.584 2.421% 24s 20.411 4.137% 97s MDVRPIBL  HGS-PyVRP 7.264 0.575% 10.4m 10.712 1.934% 20.8m MDVRPIBTW  HGS-PyVRP 13.174 7.318% 10.4m 24.149 23.231% 20.8m HGS-PyVRP (10x) 7.222 * 1.7h 10.507 * 3.5h HGS-PyVRP (10x) 12.252 * 1.7h 19.516 * 3.5h MTPOMO 7.643 5.864% 16s 11.233 6.937% 62s MTPOMO 14.614 19.416% 25s 23.057 18.135% 93s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 7.598 5.245% 14s 11.249 7.091% 56s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 13.486 10.091% 18s 21.953 12.470% 72s MVMoE/4E 7.619 5.527% 21s 11.297 7.549% 78s MVMoE/4E 14.251 16.335% 28s 24.524 25.622% 108s FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E 7.593 5.166% 18s 11.183 6.463% 73s FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E 13.514 10.324% 23s 21.894 12.168% 93s MDVRPILTW  HGS-PyVRP 13.415 8.654% 10.4m 23.440 18.695% 20.8m MDVRPIBLTW  HGS-PyVRP 13.297 8.480% 10.4m 23.194 17.481% 20.8m HGS-PyVRP (10x) 12.288 * 1.7h 19.602 * 3.5h HGS-PyVRP (10x) 12.213 * 1.7h 19.603 * 3.5h MTPOMO 13.327 8.514% 26s 21.084 7.555% 112s MTPOMO 14.495 18.765% 26s 23.133 17.996% 105s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 12.573 2.297% 19s 20.455 4.337% 83s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 13.447 10.068% 19s 22.042 12.421% 80s MVMoE/4E 13.127 6.814% 31s 22.221 13.347% 119s MVMoE/4E 14.172 16.005% 30s 24.627 25.620% 116s FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E 12.592 2.451% 25s 20.412 4.115% 107s FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E 13.467 10.237% 24s 21.973 12.076% 102s 

MDVRP, the total training represents 60% of the baselines training (30M instances from the pre-training phase plus 30M from the fine-tuning phase). 

5.4. Ablation studies 

In this section, we assess the contribution of each com-ponent of our approach through a series of ablation studies. All models in this section were trained on instances with 50 nodes, and inference was performed using a greedy decoding with ×8 instance augmentation. 

5.4.1. Curriculum learning 

To quantify the effectiveness of the CL regimen, we trained FiLMMeD-MTPOMO and FiLMMeD-MVMoE un-der three alternative strategies: 1) unified , which consists in training on variants that contain only a single constraint (i.e., MDVRP, MDOVRP, MDVRPB, MDVRPL, MDVRPTW, MDVRPI), following Liu et al. (2024); 2) full task set ,which consists in sampling uniformly across all available variants, following Berto et al. (2025); 3) standard CL , in which the initial training problem set contains only single-constraint variants. In Section 4.3.1, we argue that including three additional variants in the initial CL training set (i.e., 

A. Corrêa et al. Page 12 of 22 FiLMMeD: Feature-wise Linear Modulation for Cross-Problem MDVRP 

Table 5 

Fine-tuning performance on 1K test instances of 16 single-depot VRPs, following the setting of Zhou et al. (2024a). The best MTL results are shown in gray, and the models improved by our approach are underlined. 

Method 𝑛 = 50 𝑛 = 100 Method 𝑛 = 50 𝑛 = 100 

Obj. Gap Time Obj. Gap Time Obj. Gap Time Obj. Gap Time CVRP HGS 10.334 * 4.6m 15.504 * 9.1m VRPTW HGS 14.509 * 8.4m 24.339 * 19.6m LKH3 10.346 0.115% 9.9m 15.590 0.556% 18.0m LKH3 14.607 0.664% 5.5m 24.721 1.584% 7.8m OR-Tools (x10) 10.418 0.788% 1.7h 15.935 2.751% 3.5h OR-Tools (x10) 14.665 1.011% 1.7h 25.212 3.482% 3.5h POMO 10.418 0.806% 3s 15.734 1.488% 9s POMO 14.940 2.990% 3s 25.367 4.307% 11s MTPOMO 10.437 0.987% 3s 15.790 1.846% 9s MTPOMO 15.032 3.637% 3s 25.610 5.313% 11s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 10.457 1.185% 4s 15.797 1.895% 15s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 15.064 3.869% 4s 25.619 5.327% 20s MVMoE/4E 10.428 0.896% 4s 15.760 1.653% 11s MVMoE/4E 14.999 3.410% 4s 25.512 4.903% 12s FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E 10.446 1.082% 5s 15.789 1.841% 20s FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E 15.046 3.736% 6s 25.605 5.268% 26s OVRP LKH3 6.511 0.198% 4.5m 9.828 * 5.3m VRPL LKH3 10.571 0.790% 7.8m 15.771 * 16.0m OR-Tools (x10) 6.498 * 1.7h 9.842 0.122% 3.5h OR-Tools (x10) 10.495 * 1.7h 16.004 1.444% 3.5h POMO 6.609 1.685% 2s 10.044 2.192% 8s POMO 10.491 -0.008% 2s 15.785 0.093% 9s MTPOMO 6.671 2.634% 2s 10.169 3.458% 8s MTPOMO 10.513 0.201% 2s 15.846 0.479% 9s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 6.665 2.547% 4s 10.113 2.888% 15s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 10.527 0.333% 4s 15.849 0.502% 17s MVMoE/4E 6.655 2.402% 3s 10.138 3.136% 10s MVMoE/4E 10.501 0.092% 3s 15.812 0.261% 10s FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E 6.662 2.505% 5s 10.111 2.865% 21s FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E 10.516 0.233% 5s 15.845 0.471% 22s VRPB  OR-Tools (x10) 8.046 * 1.7h 11.878 * 3.5h OVRPTW  OR-Tools (x10) 8.683 * 1.7h 14.380 * 3.5h POMO 8.149 1.276% 2s 11.993 0.995% 7s POMO 8.891 2.377% 3s 14.728 2.467% 10s MTPOMO 8.182 1.684% 2s 12.072 1.674% 7s MTPOMO 8.987 3.470% 3s 15.008 4.411% 10s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 8.201 1.919% 3s 12.068 1.636% 13s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 8.989 3.499% 4s 14.956 4.048% 18s MVMoE/4E 8.170 1.540% 3s 12.027 1.285% 9s MVMoE/4E 8.964 3.210% 4s 14.927 3.852% 11s FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E 8.190 1.789% 4s 12.059 1.554% 17s FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E 8.973 3.312% 6s 14.939 3.929% 24s OVRPB  OR-Tools (x10) 5.745 * 1.7h 8.365 * 3.5h OVRPL  OR-Tools (x10) 6.490 * 1.7h 9.790 * 3.5h MTPOMO 6.116 6.430% 2s 8.979 7.335% 8s MTPOMO 6.668 2.734% 2s 10.126 3.441% 9s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 6.000 4.397% 4s 8.756 4.667% 14s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 6.660 2.615% 4s 10.070 2.868% 17s MVMoE/4E 6.092 5.999% 3s 8.959 7.088% 9s MVMoE/4E 6.650 2.454% 3s 10.097 3.148% 10s FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E 5.999 4.380% 5s 8.759 4.703% 18s FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E 6.659 2.582% 6s 10.070 2.869% 23s VRPBL  OR-Tools (x10) 8.029 * 1.7h 11.790 * 3.5h VRPBTW  OR-Tools (x10) 14.771 * 1.7h 25.496 * 3.5h MTPOMO 8.188 1.971% 2s 11.998 1.793% 8s MTPOMO 16.055 8.841% 3s 27.319 7.413% 10s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 8.194 2.057% 4s 11.986 1.702% 15s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 15.886 7.708% 4s 26.912 5.822% 18s MVMoE/4E 8.172 1.776% 3s 11.945 1.346% 9s MVMoE/4E 16.022 8.600% 4s 27.236 7.078% 11s FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E 8.185 1.941% 5s 11.975 1.603% 19s FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E 15.858 7.533% 6s 26.887 5.719% 23s VRPLTW  OR-Tools (x10) 14.598 * 1.7h 25.195 * 3.5h OVRPBL  OR-Tools (x10) 5.739 * 1.7h 8.348 * 3.5h MTPOMO 14.961 2.586% 3s 25.619 1.920% 12s MTPOMO 6.104 6.306% 2s 8.961 7.343% 8s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 14.999 2.835% 5s 25.628 1.942% 22s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 5.991 4.364% 4s 8.746 4.768% 15s MVMoE/4E 14.937 2.421% 4s 25.514 1.471% 13s MVMoE/4E 6.076 5.843% 3s 8.942 7.115% 9s FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E 14.978 2.696% 6s 25.610 1.854% 28s FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E 5.986 4.260% 5s 8.740 4.705% 19s OVRPBTW  OR-Tools (x10) 8.675 * 1.7h 14.384 * 3.5h OVRPLTW  OR-Tools (x10) 8.669 * 1.7h 14.279 * 3.5h MTPOMO 9.514 9.628% 3s 15.879 10.453% 10s MTPOMO 8.987 3.633% 3s 14.896 4.374% 11s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 9.415 8.504% 4s 15.619 8.653% 17s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 8.990 3.667% 5s 14.854 4.080% 20s MVMoE/4E 9.486 9.308% 4s 15.808 9.948% 11s MVMoE/4E 8.966 3.396% 4s 14.828 3.903% 12s FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E 9.390 8.216% 6s 15.607 8.572% 22s FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E 8.971 3.440% 6s 14.854 4.083% 26s VRPBLTW  OR-Tools (x10) 14.677 * 1.7h 25.342 * 3.5h OVRPBLTW  OR-Tools (x10) 8.673 * 1.7h 14.250 * 3.5h MTPOMO 15.980 9.035% 3s 27.247 7.746% 11s MTPOMO 9.532 9.851% 3s 15.738 10.498% 10s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 15.834 8.033% 5s 26.818 6.053% 20s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 9.430 8.679% 5s 15.486 8.732% 18s MVMoE/4E 15.945 8.775% 4s 27.142 7.332% 12s MVMoE/4E 9.503 9.516% 4s 15.671 10.009% 11s FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E 15.794 7.768% 6s 26.801 5.985% 25s FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E 9.415 8.505% 6s 15.481 8.692% 23s 

MDOVRPTW, MDVRPBTW and MDVRPITW) is benefi-cial to generalization. Hence, we include the standard CL 

results as well, which does not feature these three variants in the initial training set. 

Table 6 

Average objective function and gaps across 24 MDVRP vari-ants for different training strategies. Model Obj. Gap FiLMMeD-MTPOMO - unified 9.630 8.396% FiLMMeD-MTPOMO - full task set 9.320 5.295% FiLMMeD-MTPOMO - standard CL 9.306 5.134% FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 9.268 4.717% 

FiLMMeD-MVMoE - unified 9.730 9.318% FiLMMeD-MVMoE - full task set 9.298 5.046% FiLMMeD-MVMoE - standard CL 9.299 5.020% FiLMMeD-MVMoE 9.273 4.740% 

All three baselines also include the FiLM mechanism. Table 6 reports the average objective and gap for each model under the different training strategies. We observed that our CL training yields significant generalization improve-ments over the other three strategies on both FiLMMeD-MTPOMO and FiLMMeD-MVMoE. This confirms that, for MDVRP variants, a structured curriculum is essential for robust generalization. Simpler strategies like unified sam-pling – which relies on zero-shot composition – struggled on the multi-depot setting. On variants with two, three and four constraints simultaneously, it struggled to learn how these different constraints interact with one another. In contrast to the single-depot VRP, learning constraints in isolation proved insufficient for the MDVRP. One possible reason for this stems from the fact that the multi-depot structure itself acts as an additional constraint, complicating constraint interactions significantly more than in single-depot VRPs. The standard CL strategy improves upon this problem by gradually increasing the complexity of variants sampled throughout training. However, the delayed exposure to complex variants led to stagnated learning. In contrast, our CL regimen, which exposes the model to more complex con-straint interactions early on, led to a smoother convergence throughout training. We also conducted sensitivity analyses on different CL schedules, i.e., when to add more complex variants into 

A. Corrêa et al. Page 13 of 22 FiLMMeD: Feature-wise Linear Modulation for Cross-Problem MDVRP 

the training problem set. We examined two alternative cur-riculum schedules: 1) a faster progression (transitions at 25%, 50%, and 75% of epochs); and 2) a slower progression (transitions at 50%, 70%, and 90% of epochs). Figure 2 compares the learning curves of these alternatives against our selected schedule (which has transitions at 30%, 60%, and 90% of epochs). Here, we present the results from epoch 50 onward to improve visualization. Overall, our chosen schedule led to a much better generalization compared to the other two alternatives.  

> Figure 2: Comparison of different CL schedules: Evolution of the average testing objective cost across 24 MDVRP variants.

5.4.2. Preference optimization 

To assess the impact of fine-tuning FiLMMeD on single-depot variants via PO, we also fine-tuned FiLMMeD for 300 additional epochs with the standard REINFORCE with shared baselines loss, keeping all configurations and hy-perparameters identical. Figure 3 reports the convergence of both approaches over these epochs. Both FiLMMeD-MTPOMO and FiLMMeD-MVMoE display a more favor-able convergence profile when fine-tuned with PO rather than RL. We further compare the two strategies across the 16 single-depot VRP variants, reporting their average performance gaps during inference in Figure 4. The results validate the convergence improvements observed during fine-tuning, with both models outperforming their respective RL variants. As stated previously, we decided to pre-train MDVRP models with RL to better isolate the effects of the CL regimen and FiLM. However, for the sake of compari-son, we also assessed the performance of PO when pre-training the MDVRP models. Table 7 shows that PO works just as well in the multi-depot setting, yielding consistent improvements over RL across both FiLMMeD-MTPOMO and FiLMMeD-MVMoE architectures. These results further   

> Figure 3: Convergence of FiLMMeD models during fine-tuning with PO and RL (smoothed over a moving average of 20 epochs for better visualization).
> Figure 4: Average gap on 16 single-depot VRP variants of fine-tuned FiLMMeD models with PO and RL.

support its adoption as a superior alternative to RL in future MTL models.                

> Table 7
> Average gaps across all 24 MDVRP variants: RL vs. PO comparison Model RL PO FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 4.717% 4.439%
> FiLMMeD-MVMoE 4.740% 4.509%

5.4.3. FiLM 

Lastly, we evaluate the contribution of the FiLM mech-anism. For this analysis, we fine-tuned MTPOMO and MV-MoE, starting from the pre-trained models released by Zhou et al. (2024a) 1. Both models were originally trained on single-depot variants, and our goal was to extend their ca-pabilities to also handle MDVRP variants. To extend their capabilities to multi-depot settings while testing composi-tional generalization, we fine-tuned both architectures with and without FiLM on a subset of 12 variants: 6 single-depot (CVRP, OVRP, VRPTW, VRPL, VRPB, OVRPTW) and 6 multi-depot (MDVRP, MDVRPB, MDVRPL, MDOVRP, MDVRPTW, MDVRPI), holding out the remaining 28 vari-ants for zero-shot evaluation. We incorporated FiLM by extending the conditioning vector 𝑧 to 6 dimensions, adding a Boolean feature indicating whether an instance contains one or multiple depots. To preserve the prior knowledge from the pre-trained models,           

> 1https://github.com/RoyalSkye/Routing-MVMoE/tree/main/pretrained
> A. Corrêa et al. Page 14 of 22 FiLMMeD: Feature-wise Linear Modulation for Cross-Problem MDVRP
> Figure 5: Convergence of MTPOMO and MVMoE fine-tuned with and without FiLM on both single-and multi-depot variants.

we initialized the FiLM parameters as follows: 𝛾 weights set to zero with bias set to one, and 𝛽 weights and bias set to zero. This ensures that, at initialization, the FiLM layers behave as identity transformations and do not alter the existing representations. We then fine-tuned both the FiLM-augmented and original (non-FiLM) models for 500 epochs (approximately 10% of the original total training data), using 20,000 training instances per epoch. To isolate the architec-tural contribution of FiLM and ensure fair comparison with the original pre-trained models, both the FiLM-augmented and non-FiLM models were trained using the REINFORCE with shared baselines algorithm. The convergence across the 500 fine-tuning epochs is shown in Figure 5. Overall, the FiLM component resulted in a clearly smoother convergence on both models. This translated into substantially better inference perfor-mance, particularly on zero-shot generalization to unseen constraint combinations. As reported in Table 8, FiLM-augmented models consistently outperformed their non-FiLM counterparts across both seen and unseen variants. FiLM-augmented MTPOMO achieved an average gap of 5.437% compared to 5.972% for the baseline MTPOMO, with the most pronounced gains observed on the 28 held-out unseen variants (6.764% vs. 7.386%). Similarly, FiLMMeD-augmented MVMoE attained an average gap of 5.297% versus 5.716% for the standard MVMoE, with unseen variant performance improving from 7.098% to 6.620%. These results confirm our prior intuition that FiLM would enhance the performance on unseen constraint combinations.                        

> Table 8
> Generalization performance on seen vs. unseen variants. Mod-els trained on 12 variants and evaluated zero-shot on 28 held-out variants. Methods Seen (12) Unseen (28) Average MTPOMO 2.672% 7.386% 5.972% MTPOMO + FiLM 2.341% 6.764% 5.437%
> MVMoE 2.493% 7.098% 5.716% MVMoE + FiLM 2.208% 6.620% 5.297%
> Figure 6: T-SNE visualization comparison for the learned customer embeddings before and after the FiLM mechanism.
> Figure 7: T-SNE visualization comparison for the last encoder layer of different models.

To provide more empirical evidence regarding the ef-fectiveness of the FiLM mechanism, we analyzed the latent representations of all 24 MDVRP variants using the t-SNE technique (van der Maaten and Hinton, 2008). First, we compared the learned customer embeddings directly before and after the FiLM transformation. The pre-modulation em-beddings (on the left of Figure 6) reveal a latent space structured primarily by input data topology. We can see that two large cluster emerge, distinguishing variants with and without time windows. In this case, variants that differ by other constraints (such as open routes and backhauls) re-main indistinguishable and entangled within these clusters. This indicates that the linear layer (the same from equation 2) learns a generally task-agnostic unified representation, capturing fundamental spatial and demand features shared across all variants. After applying FiLM, the latent space undergoes a severe reorganization (shown on the right of Figure 6). The em-beddings are now organized into very distinct and separated clusters corresponding to each constraint combination, sug-gesting that the affine transformations performed by FiLM  

> A. Corrêa et al. Page 15 of 22

FiLMMeD: Feature-wise Linear Modulation for Cross-Problem MDVRP 

Table 9 

Performance on 1K test instances of 16 single-depot VRPs, following the setting of Berto et al. (2025). The best MTL results (among neural models) are shown in gray, and the models improved by our approach (FiLMMeD vs. respective CaDA) are underlined. 

Method 𝑛 = 50 𝑛 = 100 Method 𝑛 = 50 𝑛 = 100 

Obj. Gap Time Obj. Gap Time Obj. Gap Time Obj. Gap Time CVRP HGS-PyVRP 10.372 * 10.4m 15.628 * 20.8m VRPTW HGS-PyVRP 16.031 * 10.4m 25.423 * 20.8m OR-Tools 10.572 1.907% 10.4m 16.280 4.178% 20.8m OR-Tools 16.089 0.347% 10.4m 25.814 1.506% 20.8m MTPOMO 10.520 1.423% 2s 15.941 2.030% 8s MTPOMO 16.419 2.423% 2s 26.433 3.962% 9s MVMoE 10.499 1.229% 3s 15.888 1.693% 11s MVMoE 16.400 2.298% 3s 26.390 3.789% 11s RouteFinder 10.502 1.257% 2s 15.860 1.524% 8s RouteFinder 16.341 1.933% 2s 26.228 3.154% 8s CaDA 10.494 1.182% 2s 15.870 1.578% 8s CaDA 16.278 1.536% 2s 26.070 2.530% 8s FiLMMeD-CaDA 10.468 0.924% 4s 15.793 1.089% 19s FiLMMeD-CaDA 16.266 1.461% 4s 26.029 2.365% 20s CaDA † 10.476 1.012% 5s 15.800 1.139% 28s CaDA † 16.291 1.616% 6s 26.106 2.673% 31s FiLMMeD-CaDA † 10.461 0.865% 5s 15.762 0.894% 28s FiLMMeD-CaDA † 16.251 1.365% 6s 26.062 2.494% 31s OVRP HGS-PyVRP 6.507 * 10.4m 9.725 * 20.8m VRPL HGS-PyVRP 10.587 * 10.4m 15.766 * 20.8m OR-Tools 6.553 0.686% 10.4m 9.995 2.732% 20.8m OR-Tools 10.570 2.343% 10.4m 16.466 5.302% 20.8m MTPOMO 6.717 3.194% 2s 10.216 5.028% 8s MTPOMO 10.775 1.733% 2s 16.157 2.483% 8s MVMoE 6.705 3.003% 3s 10.177 4.617% 11s MVMoE 10.753 1.525% 3s 16.099 2.113% 11s RouteFinder 6.682 2.658% 2s 10.115 3.996% 8s RouteFinder 10.747 1.485% 2s 16.057 1.858% 8s CaDA 6.670 2.468% 2s 10.121 4.045% 8s CaDA 10.731 1.333% 2s 16.057 1.847% 8s FiLMMeD-CaDA 6.649 2.148% 4s 10.078 3.605% 19s FiLMMeD-CaDA 10.706 1.101% 4s 15.988 1.419% 19s CaDA † 6.658 2.293% 5s 10.078 3.616% 29s CaDA † 10.711 1.152% 5s 15.987 1.424% 29s FiLMMeD-CaDA † 6.647 2.128% 5s 10.030 3.115% 29s FiLMMeD-CaDA † 10.699 1.044% 5s 15.950 1.181% 29s VRPB HGS-PyVRP 9.687 * 10.4m 14.377 * 20.8m OVRPTW HGS-PyVRP 10.510 * 10.4m 16.926 * 20.8m OR-Tools 9.802 1.159% 10.4m 14.933 3.853% 20.8m OR-Tools 10.519 0.078% 10.4m 17.027 0.583% 20.8m MTPOMO 10.036 3.596% 2s 15.102 5.052% 8s MTPOMO 10.676 1.558% 2s 17.442 3.022% 9s MVMoE 10.007 3.292% 3s 15.023 4.505% 10s MVMoE 10.674 1.541% 3s 17.416 2.870% 12s RouteFinder 9.979 3.000% 2s 14.935 3.906% 8s RouteFinder 10.645 1.264% 2s 17.328 2.352% 9s CaDA 9.960 2.800% 2s 14.960 4.038% 8s CaDA 10.613 0.957% 2s 17.226 1.751% 9s FiLMMeD-CaDA 9.925 2.442% 4s 14.859 3.369% 19s FiLMMeD-CaDA 10.611 0.940% 4s 17.214 1.678% 19s CaDA † 9.931 2.502% 5s 14.852 3.319% 28s CaDA † 10.623 1.058% 6s 17.247 1.876% 32s FiLMMeD-CaDA † 9.909 2.278% 5s 14.801 2.964% 28s FiLMMeD-CaDA † 10.597 0.810% 6s 17.232 1.781% 33s VRPBL HGS-PyVRP 10.186 * 10.4m 14.779 * 20.8m VRPBLTW HGS-PyVRP 18.361 * 10.4m 29.026 * 20.8m OR-Tools 10.331 1.390% 10.4m 15.426 4.338% 20.8m OR-Tools 18.422 0.332% 10.4m 29.830 2.770% 20.8m MTPOMO 10.679 4.760% 2s 15.718 6.294% 8s MTPOMO 19.001 2.199% 3s 30.948 3.794% 9s MVMoE 10.639 4.384% 3s 15.642 5.771% 11s MVMoE 18.983 2.097% 3s 30.892 3.609% 12s RouteFinder 10.569 3.713% 2s 15.523 5.008% 8s RouteFinder 18.910 1.713% 2s 30.705 2.978% 9s CaDA 10.543 3.461% 2s 15.525 5.001% 8s CaDA 18.848 1.376% 2s 30.520 2.359% 9s FiLMMeD-CaDA 10.512 3.152% 4s 15.424 4.318% 19s FiLMMeD-CaDA 18.848 1.369% 4s 30.499 2.287% 19s CaDA † 10.511 3.143% 5s 15.397 4.153% 29s CaDA † 18.869 1.484% 5s 30.556 2.483% 32s FiLMMeD-CaDA † 10.497 3.005% 5s 15.342 3.776% 29s FiLMMeD-CaDA † 18.832 1.288% 6s 30.523 2.371% 32s VRPBTW HGS-PyVRP 18.292 * 10.4m 29.467 * 20.8m VRPLTW HGS-PyVRP 16.356 * 10.4m 25.757 * 20.8m OR-Tools 18.366 0.383% 10.4m 29.945 1.597% 20.8m OR-Tools 16.441 0.499% 10.4m 26.259 1.899% 20.8m MTPOMO 18.649 1.938% 2s 30.478 3.426% 9s MTPOMO 16.832 2.877% 2s 26.913 4.455% 9s MVMoE 18.632 1.841% 3s 30.437 3.284% 12s MVMoE 16.817 2.783% 3s 26.866 4.272% 12s RouteFinder 18.573 1.517% 2s 30.249 2.641% 9s RouteFinder 16.728 2.248% 2s 26.706 3.645% 9s CaDA 18.500 1.117% 2s 30.059 1.999% 9s CaDA 16.669 1.879% 2s 26.540 2.995% 9s FiLMMeD-CaDA 18.497 1.105% 4s 30.042 1.938% 21s FiLMMeD-CaDA 16.661 1.836% 4s 26.498 2.836% 20s CaDA † 18.524 1.251% 6s 30.115 2.188% 32s CaDA † 16.684 1.984% 6s 26.548 3.043% 31s FiLMMeD-CaDA † 18.484 1.034% 6s 30.076 2.059% 31s FiLMMeD-CaDA † 16.636 1.688% 6s 26.510 2.883% 31s OVRPB HGS-PyVRP 6.898 * 10.4m 10.335 * 20.8m OVRPBL HGS-PyVRP 6.899 * 10.4m 10.335 * 20.8m OR-Tools 6.928 0.412% 10.4m 10.577 2.315% 20.8m OR-Tools 6.927 0.386% 10.4m 10.582 2.363% 20.8m MTPOMO 7.105 2.973% 2s 10.882 5.264% 8s MTPOMO 7.112 3.053% 2s 10.888 5.318% 8s MVMoE 7.089 2.744% 3s 10.841 4.869% 11s MVMoE 7.094 2.799% 3s 10.847 4.929% 11s RouteFinder 7.065 2.385% 2s 10.774 4.233% 8s RouteFinder 7.068 2.417% 2s 10.778 4.266% 8s CaDA 7.049 2.159% 2s 10.762 4.099% 8s CaDA 7.051 2.166% 2s 10.762 4.102% 8s FiLMMeD-CaDA 7.027 1.844% 4s 10.695 3.456% 20s FiLMMeD-CaDA 7.028 1.846% 4s 10.695 3.459% 20s CaDA † 7.038 2.003% 6s 10.708 3.592% 30s CaDA † 7.040 2.011% 5s 10.709 3.598% 29s FiLMMeD-CaDA † 7.024 1.802% 6s 10.655 3.071% 29s FiLMMeD-CaDA † 7.025 1.797% 5s 10.655 3.074% 30s OVRPBLTW HGS-PyVRP 11.668 * 10.4m 19.156 * 20.8m OVRPBTW HGS-PyVRP 11.669 * 10.4m 19.156 * 20.8m OR-Tools 11.681 0.106% 10.4m 19.305 0.767% 20.8m OR-Tools 11.682 0.109% 10.4m 19.303 0.757% 20.8m MTPOMO 11.823 1.315% 3s 19.658 2.602% 9s MTPOMO 11.823 1.307% 3s 19.656 2.592% 9s MVMoE 11.816 1.249% 4s 19.640 2.514% 12s MVMoE 11.816 1.245% 4s 19.637 2.499% 13s RouteFinder 11.789 1.017% 2s 19.554 2.061% 9s RouteFinder 11.790 1.027% 2s 19.555 2.062% 9s CaDA 11.760 0.771% 2s 19.435 1.439% 9s CaDA 11.761 0.779% 2s 19.436 1.441% 9s FiLMMeD-CaDA 11.754 0.721% 4s 19.437 1.441% 22s FiLMMeD-CaDA 11.754 0.719% 4s 19.435 1.434% 22s CaDA † 11.773 0.885% 7s 19.479 1.666% 33s CaDA † 11.774 0.892% 6s 19.478 1.663% 34s FiLMMeD-CaDA † 11.747 0.665% 6s 19.456 1.546% 34s FiLMMeD-CaDA † 11.747 0.655% 7s 19.454 1.537% 33s OVRPL HGS-PyVRP 6.507 * 10.4m 9.724 * 20.8m OVRPLTW HGS-PyVRP 10.510 * 10.4m 16.926 * 20.8m OR-Tools 6.552 0.668% 10.4m 10.001 2.791% 20.8m OR-Tools 10.497 0.114% 10.4m 17.023 0.728% 20.8m MTPOMO 6.720 3.248% 2s 10.224 5.112% 8s MTPOMO 10.677 1.572% 2s 17.442 3.020% 9s MVMoE 6.706 3.028% 3s 10.184 4.693% 11s MVMoE 10.677 1.564% 3s 17.418 2.880% 12s RouteFinder 6.683 2.680% 2s 10.121 4.054% 8s RouteFinder 10.646 1.267% 2s 17.328 2.352% 9s CaDA 6.671 2.475% 2s 10.122 4.052% 8s CaDA 10.613 0.961% 2s 17.226 1.752% 9s FiLMMeD-CaDA 6.650 2.157% 4s 10.078 3.604% 20s FiLMMeD-CaDA 10.609 0.926% 4s 17.214 1.678% 21s CaDA † 6.658 2.295% 5s 10.081 3.647% 29s CaDA † 10.623 1.060% 6s 17.245 1.870% 32s FiLMMeD-CaDA † 6.647 2.122% 5s 10.027 3.089% 29s FiLMMeD-CaDA † 10.598 0.819% 6s 17.232 1.785% 32s 

successfully disentangle task specific features from general ones. After, we compared the learned representations of both FiLMMeD models and its baselines by extracting the learned node embeddings from the last encoder layer, that is, 

ℎ(𝐿 )

𝑖 , ∀𝑣 𝑖 ∈ . Figure 7 presents the t-SNE projec-tions of these embeddings for FiLMMeD-MTPOMO and FiLMMeD-MVMoE and their respective baselines. Over-all, we can see that FiLMMeD exhibits more structured and well-defined clusters, particularly for variants involving route length limits, backhauls, and time windows. This sug-gests that the FiLM mechanism effectively helps the model modulate its internal representations, allowing it to better adapt towards diverse constraint combinations. 

A. Corrêa et al. Page 16 of 22 FiLMMeD: Feature-wise Linear Modulation for Cross-Problem MDVRP 

Table 10 

Testing results on Cordeau MDVRP benchmark instances. The best neural-based method results are shown in gray, and the models improved by FiLMMeD are underlined. Variant HGS-PyVRP MTPOMO FiLMMeD-MTPOMO MVMoE/4E FiLMMeD-MVMoE/4E Obj. Gap Time Obj. Gap Time Obj. Gap Time Obj. Gap Time Obj. Gap Time MDVRP 1851.19 * 5m 2034.98 9.031% 7s 2046.08 10.062% 7s 1993.30 6.951% 9s 2044.86 9.969% 9s MDOVRP 1386.02 * 5m 1722.21 22.915% 7s 1541.42 9.852% 8s 1762.79 26.103% 9s 1538.02 9.874% 10s MDVRPB 1756.56 * 5m 1964.27 10.999% 8s 1984.85 12.472% 8s 1940.64 9.465% 10s 1974.97 11.452% 10s MDVRPL 1898.82 * 5m 2035.81 6.704% 9s 2040.60 7.327% 8s 1993.35 4.629% 11s 2037.33 7.180% 11s MDVRPTW 3098.46 * 5m 3476.98 11.196% 10s 3414.85 9.426% 10s 3515.88 12.521% 13s 3389.29 8.600% 12s MDOVRPTW 2153.43 * 5m 2761.57 25.751% 10s 2394.81 9.788% 11s 2789.77 27.329% 13s 2342.40 7.757% 13s MDOVRPB 1374.08 * 5m 1782.25 28.145% 8s 1573.51 13.156% 8s 1809.60 30.541% 10s 1559.18 12.140% 10s MDOVRPL 1385.97 * 5m 1722.21 22.918% 8s 1540.99 10.177% 9s 1762.79 26.106% 10s 1544.24 10.244% 11s MDVRPBL 1760.30 * 5m 1965.26 10.469% 9s 1990.50 12.380% 9s 1953.89 10.018% 10s 1980.99 11.644% 10s MDVRPBTW 3120.24 * 5m 3715.97 18.304% 11s 3644.22 15.843% 11s 3873.42 23.343% 14s 3632.57 15.488% 13s MDVRPLTW 3086.58 * 5m 3454.22 10.749% 11s 3394.27 8.823% 12s 3490.28 11.739% 14s 3370.09 8.230% 14s MDOVRPBL 1373.20 * 5m 1798.56 29.549% 8s 1575.64 13.698% 9s 1813.13 31.042% 10s 1570.14 13.322% 11s MDOVRPBTW 2164.82 * 5m 2917.39 32.298% 11s 2497.26 14.340% 12s 2979.77 36.011% 13s 2479.57 13.378% 14s MDOVRPLTW 2167.34 * 5m 2775.88 25.798% 11s 2412.36 10.179% 12s 2785.94 26.917% 14s 2378.96 8.680% 15s MDVRPBLTW 3123.13 * 5m 3735.69 18.527% 12s 3677.44 17.156% 12s 3820.79 21.443% 15s 3638.68 15.225% 14s MDOVRPBLTW 2156.32 * 5m 2901.50 31.718% 12s 2520.55 14.978% 13s 2928.39 33.111% 14s 2493.31 13.845% 15s MDVRPI 1870.61 * 5m 2048.13 9.479% 8s 2073.85 10.965% 9s 2040.77 8.963% 11s 2075.04 11.000% 11s MDVRPIB 1771.57 * 5m 2009.43 12.889% 9s 2026.46 14.129% 9s 2033.86 13.889% 11s 2023.05 14.125% 11s MDVRPIL 1873.33 * 5m 2052.86 9.624% 10s 2073.89 10.805% 10s 2033.39 8.586% 12s 2068.03 10.385% 12s MDVRPITW 3084.07 * 5m 4437.59 44.428% 14s 3394.66 8.963% 11s 3609.96 16.672% 14s 3359.50 7.986% 13s MDVRPIBL 1776.03 * 5m 2028.43 13.655% 10s 2011.70 13.287% 10s 2035.19 14.109% 12s 2004.44 13.279% 12s MDVRPIBTW 3097.93 * 5m 4797.86 55.065% 15s 3647.92 16.986% 11s 3931.74 26.356% 14s 3588.74 15.070% 14s MDVRPILTW 3071.28 * 5m 4496.17 44.037% 16s 3415.15 10.023% 12s 3589.49 16.553% 15s 3369.62 8.674% 15s MDVRPIBLTW 3069.37 * 5m 4848.59 59.088% 16s 3578.70 15.900% 12s 3869.80 26.123% 16s 3550.08 14.561% 15s Avg. 2227.94 * 5m 2811.83 23.472% 10s 2519.65 12.113% 10s 2681.58 19.522% 12s 2500.55 11.338% 12s 

5.5. Results on single-depot variants (Berto et al. (2025) setting) 

Like Liu et al. (2025), we evaluate our approach across two distinct standardized experimental settings from the literature. This section details the results for 16 single-depot VRP variants using the setting defined by Berto et al. (2025). For these experiments, we trained a variation of CaDA (Li et al., 2025) from scratch for 300 epochs. This version, denoted as FiLMMeD-CaDA , incorporates the key contributions proposed in this work while retaining the core dual-attention architecture of CaDA. Specifically, we added the proposed FiLM mechanism to the encoder. Fur-thermore, instead of the traditional REINFORCE loss, we employed PO for training, setting 𝛼 = 0.03 , following the recommendations of Pan et al. (2025a). Since our cur-riculum was designed for the MDVRP, we maintained the same mixed batch training strategy from the original work (where a single batch can contain instances from multiple different variants). All the key hyper-parameters of CaDA were kept the same for FiLMMeD-CaDA. We also include an additional FiLMMeD-CaDA † variation, which combines FiLMMeD-CaDA with ReLD (Huang et al., 2025). For neural baselines, we include results on MTPOMO, MVMoE, RouteFinder (in particular, their modern Transformer-based Encoder version), CaDA and CaDA †.Table 9 presents the main results on 16 single-depot VRP variants, of 50 and 100 nodes. Overall, both FiLMMeD-CaDA and FiLMMeD-CaDA † consistently outperformed their non-FiLMMeD counterparts across the majority of cases, further consolidating the effectiveness of our pro-posed contributions. Additionally, FiLMMeD-CaDA † dis-played the best overall results across all other baselines, with an average performance gap of 1.46% on 50-node instances, and 2.35% on 100-node instances. 

5.6. Results on benchmark datasets 

We also evaluate the performance of previous models on benchmark datasets. For the MDVRP, we generated new datasets derived from the 10 instances of Cordeau et al. (1997). While often cited as MDVRP problems, these in-stances originally imposed route length limits (MDVRPL). We utilized their original node coordinates and demands to create 10 corresponding instances for each of the 23 remaining variants, totaling 240 benchmark instances. Miss-ing attributes were generated following Section 5.1: 20% of customers were randomly assigned as backhauls, and time windows were generated using the standard protocol. All models were evaluated using a greedy decoding with 

×8 instance augmentation. For each instance, we ran HGS-PyVRP with a 5-minute runtime limit. Table 10 presents the results, averaged across the 10 instances for each variant. Once again, both FiLMMeD models showed a significantly better performance than their respective baselines across most variants. For single-depot VRPs, we utilized the models from Table 9, that is, FiLMMeD-CaDA and FiLMMeD-CaDA †.Here, we considered the Set-X benchmark (Uchoa et al., 2017) from CVRPLib, which contains instances ranging from 100 to 1000 nodes. Similar to the previous MDVRP 

A. Corrêa et al. Page 17 of 22 FiLMMeD: Feature-wise Linear Modulation for Cross-Problem MDVRP 

Table 11 

Results on CVRPLib instances from the Set-X (Uchoa et al., 2017). The best individual results are shown in gray. 

Set-X MTPOMO MVMoE RouteFinder CaDA FiLMMeD-CaDA CaDA † FiLMMeD-CaDA † DBDA Instance Opt. Cost Gap Cost Gap Cost Gap Cost Gap Cost Gap Cost Gap Cost Gap Cost Gap X-n101-k25 27591 29470 6.810% 29076 5.382% 29048 5.281% 28944 4.904% 29095 5.451% 28840 4.527% 28848 4.556% 28965 4.980% X-n106-k14 26362 28029 6.323% 27443 4.101% 27159 3.023% 27042 2.579% 26826 1.760% 26815 1.718% 26733 1.407% 26740 1.434% X-n110-k13 14971 15100 0.862% 15327 2.378% 15314 2.291% 15229 1.723% 15203 1.549% 15343 2.485% 15197 1.510% 15083 0.748% X-n115-k10 12747 13433 5.382% 13475 5.711% 13338 4.636% 13060 2.455% 13244 3.899% 13210 3.632% 13080 2.612% 13149 3.154% X-n120-k6 13332 14051 5.393% 13782 3.375% 13765 3.248% 13678 2.595% 13552 1.650% 13771 3.293% 13628 2.220% 13575 1.823% X-n125-k30 55539 59015 6.259% 58200 4.791% 58570 5.457% 57748 3.977% 57815 4.098% 57800 4.071% 57816 4.100% 57833 4.130% X-n129-k18 28940 30176 4.271% 29334 1.361% 29457 1.786% 29500 1.935% 29397 1.579% 29399 1.586% 29261 1.109% 29460 1.797% X-n134-k13 10916 11707 7.246% 11462 5.002% 11624 6.486% 11652 6.742% 11367 4.132% 11231 2.886% 11224 2.822% 11483 5.194% X-n139-k10 13590 14058 3.444% 14099 3.745% 13812 1.634% 13940 2.575% 13929 2.494% 14004 3.046% 13856 1.957% 13944 2.605% X-n143-k7 15700 16626 5.898% 16349 4.134% 16257 3.548% 16189 3.115% 16107 2.592% 16222 3.325% 16053 2.248% 16056 2.268% X-n148-k46 43448 46648 7.365% 45893 5.627% 45026 3.632% 45606 4.967% 45704 5.193% 45226 4.092% 45824 5.469% 46689 7.459% X-n153-k22 21220 23514 10.811% 23661 11.503% 23478 10.641% 23142 9.057% 23019 8.478% 22750 7.210% 23026 8.511% 22783 7.366% X-n157-k13 16876 17922 6.198% 17439 3.336% 17315 2.601% 17295 2.483% 17270 2.335% 17205 1.950% 17193 1.878% 17120 1.446% X-n162-k11 14138 14616 3.381% 14705 4.010% 14664 3.720% 14704 4.003% 14713 4.067% 14494 2.518% 14477 2.398% 14630 3.480% X-n167-k10 20557 21662 5.375% 21504 4.607% 21425 4.222% 21078 2.534% 21180 3.029% 21330 3.760% 21249 3.366% 21209 3.172% X-n172-k51 45607 48960 7.352% 47883 4.990% 48162 5.602% 48198 5.681% 47543 4.245% 47688 4.563% 47559 4.280% 48513 6.372% X-n176-k26 47812 51989 8.736% 52117 9.004% 51501 7.716% 51120 6.919% 51711 8.155% 51381 7.465% 51024 6.718% 53069 10.995% X-n181-k23 25569 26572 3.923% 26456 3.469% 26097 2.065% 26262 2.710% 26024 1.780% 25968 1.560% 25953 1.502% 26088 2.030% X-n186-k15 24145 25236 4.519% 25151 4.166% 25153 4.175% 25345 4.970% 25197 4.357% 24974 3.433% 24868 2.994% 25218 4.444% X-n190-k8 16980 18369 8.180% 19078 12.356% 17871 5.247% 17882 5.312% 17812 4.900% 17834 5.029% 17646 3.922% 17379 2.350% X-n195-k51 44225 48310 9.237% 46974 6.216% 47396 7.170% 46723 5.648% 46400 4.919% 46124 4.294% 46316 4.728% 47612 7.659% X-n200-k36 58578 62041 5.912% 61627 5.205% 61139 4.372% 61010 4.152% 60833 3.850% 60958 4.063% 60773 3.747% 60926 4.008% X-n204-k19 19565 20652 5.556% 20584 5.208% 20531 4.937% 20735 5.980% 20491 4.733% 20342 3.971% 20356 4.043% 20671 5.653% X-n209-k16 30656 32333 5.470% 32358 5.552% 31876 3.980% 32184 4.984% 32248 5.193% 31890 4.025% 31735 3.520% 31939 4.185% X-n214-k11 10856 11699 7.765% 11597 6.826% 11668 7.480% 11748 8.217% 11659 7.397% 11487 5.812% 11469 5.647% 11411 5.112% X-n219-k73 117595 121980 3.729% 124434 5.816% 120344 2.338% 120011 2.055% 122996 4.593% 120304 2.304% 119142 1.316% 119959 2.010% X-n223-k34 40437 43381 7.280% 42694 5.582% 42251 4.486% 42273 4.540% 42178 4.305% 42200 4.360% 41926 3.682% 42075 4.051% X-n228-k23 25742 28523 10.803% 28033 8.900% 28699 11.487% 27821 8.076% 27523 6.919% 27547 7.012% 27724 7.699% 28169 9.428% X-n233-k16 19230 20644 7.353% 20656 7.415% 20761 7.962% 20285 5.486% 20538 6.801% 20118 4.618% 20307 5.601% 20424 6.209% X-n237-k14 27042 30047 11.112% 29772 10.095% 29595 9.441% 30282 11.981% 29952 10.762% 29566 9.334% 29419 8.790% 28179 4.205% X-n242-k48 82751 88179 6.559% 87497 5.735% 85704 3.569% 85813 3.700% 85576 3.414% 85775 3.654% 85636 3.486% 85665 3.521% X-n247-k50 37274 41610 11.633% 40973 9.924% 40642 9.036% 39918 7.093% 40444 8.504% 40359 8.277% 39666 6.417% 41103 10.273% Avg. Gap ( 𝑛 < 251 ) 6.566% 5.829% 5.061% 4.772% 4.399% 4.309% 3.758% 4.486% X-n251-k28 38684 41211 6.532% 41330 6.840% 40127 3.730% 40359 4.330% 40247 4.040% 40003 3.410% 39912 3.174% 40220 3.971% X-n256-k16 18839 20400 8.286% 20559 9.130% 19994 6.131% 20372 8.137% 20086 6.619% 20061 6.487% 19838 5.303% 20087 6.625% X-n261-k13 26558 28741 8.220% 28524 7.403% 28510 7.350% 28833 8.566% 28631 7.805% 28256 6.394% 27962 5.287% 28310 6.597% X-n266-k58 75478 84617 12.108% 82048 8.705% 79832 5.769% 80115 6.144% 80247 6.318% 79480 5.302% 79578 5.432% 79363 5.147% X-n270-k35 35291 38146 8.090% 38333 8.620% 37382 5.925% 37674 6.752% 37360 5.862% 36927 4.636% 36798 4.270% 37138 5.234% X-n275-k28 21245 24688 16.206% 25021 17.774% 24187 13.848% 24482 15.237% 24347 14.601% 24127 13.566% 24185 13.839% 22405 5.460% X-n280-k17 33503 36677 9.474% 36636 9.351% 36653 9.402% 36081 7.695% 35844 6.987% 35370 5.573% 35545 6.095% 35769 6.764% X-n284-k15 20226 22474 11.114% 22583 11.653% 22154 9.532% 22295 10.229% 21916 8.355% 21619 6.887% 21697 7.273% 21605 6.818% X-n289-k60 95151 104159 9.467% 102202 7.410% 100418 5.535% 99739 4.822% 100808 5.945% 100451 5.570% 98873 3.912% 99962 5.056% X-n294-k50 47161 52769 11.891% 50886 7.898% 50637 7.370% 49929 5.869% 49980 5.977% 49318 4.574% 49614 5.201% 50028 6.079% X-n298-k31 34231 37652 9.994% 37344 9.094% 37163 8.565% 36993 8.069% 36497 6.620% 36189 5.720% 36084 5.413% 36601 6.924% X-n303-k21 21736 23556 8.373% 23263 7.025% 23442 7.849% 23748 9.257% 23295 7.174% 22937 5.525% 22879 5.259% 23312 7.251% X-n308-k13 25859 28736 11.126% 28518 10.283% 28326 9.540% 28913 11.810% 28219 9.125% 27714 7.174% 27586 6.679% 28394 9.803% X-n313-k71 94043 102253 8.730% 100620 6.994% 99564 5.871% 98899 5.164% 99511 5.814% 98667 4.917% 97780 3.974% 98535 4.777% X-n317-k53 78355 82587 5.401% 83632 6.735% 80690 2.980% 80542 2.791% 81804 4.402% 80206 2.362% 80138 2.276% 79907 1.981% X-n322-k28 29834 32593 9.248% 33497 12.278% 32658 9.466% 33206 11.303% 32959 10.474% 32047 7.418% 32089 7.558% 32746 9.761% X-n327-k20 27532 30646 11.310% 30603 11.154% 29784 8.180% 30953 12.426% 30280 9.980% 29763 8.103% 29522 7.228% 30349 10.232% X-n331-k15 31102 34734 11.678% 33636 8.147% 34048 9.472% 34578 11.176% 34200 9.960% 33203 6.755% 33068 6.321% 33794 8.655% X-n336-k84 139111 152846 9.873% 149229 7.273% 146620 5.398% 146707 5.460% 149982 7.815% 146345 5.200% 144870 4.140% 147474 6.012% X-n344-k43 42050 46619 10.866% 46947 11.646% 44914 6.811% 45571 8.373% 45044 7.121% 44563 5.976% 44438 5.679% 44850 6.659% X-n351-k40 25896 29243 12.925% 28373 9.565% 28236 9.036% 28059 8.353% 28101 8.515% 27495 6.175% 27585 6.522% 27676 6.874% X-n359-k29 51505 55778 8.296% 56165 9.048% 55122 7.023% 55183 7.141% 54884 6.561% 54125 5.087% 53857 4.567% 53808 4.471% X-n367-k17 22814 26132 14.544% 25588 12.159% 25522 11.870% 25534 11.923% 25094 9.994% 24323 6.614% 24443 7.140% 24893 9.113% X-n376-k94 147713 156857 6.190% 156546 5.980% 151975 2.885% 151390 2.489% 152539 3.267% 151129 2.313% 149853 1.449% 150506 1.891% X-n384-k52 65940 73705 11.776% 73570 11.571% 70471 6.871% 70611 7.084% 70044 6.223% 68838 4.395% 69524 5.435% 70002 6.160% X-n393-k38 38260 43533 13.782% 44638 16.670% 41552 8.604% 42934 12.216% 41929 9.590% 41394 8.191% 40981 7.112% 42105 10.050% X-n401-k29 66154 71565 8.179% 71787 8.515% 69430 4.952% 69875 5.625% 69596 5.203% 68591 3.684% 68410 3.410% 69872 5.620% X-n411-k19 19712 23869 21.089% 23139 17.385% 22849 15.914% 23521 19.323% 23198 17.685% 21621 9.684% 21851 10.851% 22508 14.184% X-n420-k130 107798 122761 13.881% 116362 7.944% 117418 8.924% 115012 6.692% 115837 7.457% 114105 5.851% 113290 5.095% 116654 8.215% X-n429-k61 65449 74261 13.464% 74158 13.307% 70164 7.204% 70969 8.434% 70546 7.792% 69282 5.856% 69491 6.176% 70129 7.151% X-n439-k37 36391 41165 13.119% 42161 15.856% 39752 9.236% 41149 13.075% 39887 9.606% 39175 7.650% 38809 6.645% 40381 10.964% X-n449-k29 55233 60162 8.924% 60015 8.658% 60634 9.779% 61144 10.702% 60812 10.101% 59136 7.066% 59033 6.880% 60116 8.841% X-n459-k26 24139 29543 22.387% 29100 20.552% 27347 13.290% 28267 17.101% 27435 13.654% 26334 9.093% 26554 10.005% 26712 10.659% X-n469-k138 221824 252031 13.618% 245581 10.710% 238904 7.700% 237548 7.089% 243469 9.758% 238868 7.684% 234044 5.509% 237471 7.054% X-n480-k70 89449 101314 13.265% 100121 11.931% 95032 6.242% 95466 6.727% 95167 6.392% 94341 5.469% 93986 5.072% 94618 5.779% X-n491-k59 66483 77536 16.625% 75226 13.151% 72618 9.228% 71702 7.850% 72031 8.345% 70501 6.044% 70411 5.908% 71793 7.987% Avg. Gap ( 251 ≤ 𝑛 < 501 ) 11.529% 10.616% 8.107% 8.889% 8.237% 6.295% 5.913% 7.079% X-n502-k39 69226 75711 9.368% 77033 11.278% 71908 3.874% 72655 4.953% 72108 4.163% 71726 3.611% 71271 2.954% 71599 3.428% X-n513-k21 24201 34910 44.250% 32858 35.771% 28542 17.937% 29422 21.573% 28844 19.185% 26767 10.603% 27202 12.400% 28136 16.260% X-n524-k153 154593 176491 14.165% 171734 11.088% 174150 12.651% 168181 8.790% 165183 6.849% 168238 8.826% 166429 7.656% 172677 11.698% X-n536-k96 94846 109897 15.869% 106031 11.793% 103242 8.852% 102355 7.917% 102551 8.123% 100967 6.454% 100532 5.995% 102177 7.729% X-n548-k50 86700 110984 28.009% 104240 20.231% 100850 16.321% 102318 18.014% 101100 16.609% 98583 13.706% 99247 14.472% 94022 8.445% X-n561-k42 42717 55936 30.946% 53110 24.330% 49133 15.020% 50287 17.721% 48537 13.624% 47301 10.731% 47134 10.340% 49390 15.621% X-n573-k30 50673 60884 20.151% 62033 22.418% 56048 10.607% 55353 9.236% 54571 7.692% 53624 5.824% 53974 6.514% 53807 6.185% X-n586-k159 190316 226245 18.879% 212545 11.680% 205654 8.059% 204649 7.531% 208415 9.509% 204726 7.572% 201846 6.058% 204828 7.625% X-n599-k92 108451 131035 20.824% 126654 16.785% 116840 7.735% 117784 8.606% 117440 8.289% 115132 6.160% 115224 6.245% 116627 7.539% X-n613-k62 59535 77555 30.268% 73633 23.680% 67545 13.454% 69069 16.014% 67296 13.035% 65123 9.386% 65851 10.609% 67346 13.120% X-n627-k43 62164 76776 23.506% 70744 13.802% 67523 8.621% 69361 11.577% 69915 12.468% 67301 8.264% 66603 7.141% 77841 25.219% X-n641-k35 63684 83138 30.548% 71986 13.036% 70631 10.909% 73624 15.608% 72517 13.870% 69308 8.831% 69601 9.291% 70952 11.413% X-n655-k131 106780 120771 13.103% 118758 11.217% 112289 5.159% 110657 3.631% 112598 5.449% 109726 2.759% 109505 2.552% 109546 2.590% X-n670-k130 146332 183183 25.183% 168210 14.951% 168829 15.374% 161571 10.414% 160473 9.664% 161354 10.266% 158554 8.352% 164643 12.513% X-n685-k75 68205 92701 35.915% 82607 21.116% 77890 14.200% 78473 15.055% 76817 12.626% 74689 9.507% 74523 9.263% 77686 13.901% X-n701-k44 81923 92723 13.183% 89704 9.498% 90580 10.567% 92198 12.542% 91600 11.812% 88246 7.718% 87910 7.308% 91921 12.204% X-n716-k35 43373 59383 36.912% 52170 20.282% 49480 14.080% 50605 16.674% 50073 15.446% 47683 9.937% 47292 9.036% 51944 19.761% X-n733-k159 136187 175848 29.122% 156268 14.745% 148581 9.101% 146080 7.264% 146443 7.531% 144836 6.351% 142941 4.959% 145364 6.739% X-n749-k98 77269 102208 32.276% 92403 19.586% 85046 10.065% 85325 10.426% 85320 10.419% 82650 6.964% 83014 7.435% 84975 9.973% X-n766-k71 114417 132968 16.213% 130101 13.708% 129866 13.502% 127752 11.655% 126515 10.573% 124163 8.518% 123989 8.366% 130645 14.183% X-n783-k48 72386 108577 49.997% 96432 33.219% 82839 14.441% 87562 20.965% 87027 20.226% 80255 10.871% 80501 11.211% 87629 21.058% X-n801-k40 73311 92125 25.663% 87187 18.928% 86121 17.474% 94076 28.325% 90039 22.818% 84979 15.916% 84397 15.122% 80746 10.142% X-n819-k171 158121 192102 21.491% 178856 13.113% 174446 10.324% 172387 9.022% 172578 9.143% 170347 7.732% 168486 6.555% 170573 7.875% X-n837-k142 193737 231002 19.235% 230226 18.834% 208669 7.707% 209540 8.157% 208974 7.865% 205416 6.028% 205231 5.933% 206980 6.836% X-n856-k95 88965 117243 31.786% 105763 18.882% 98164 10.340% 102312 15.003% 100818 13.324% 96653 8.642% 98082 10.248% 100106 12.523% X-n876-k59 99299 114212 15.018% 114175 14.981% 107477 8.236% 109693 10.467% 108742 9.509% 105570 6.315% 105116 5.858% 113121 13.920% X-n895-k37 53860 106062 96.922% 70363 30.641% 64225 19.244% 73280 36.056% 70673 31.216% 62387 15.832% 61973 15.063% 74729 38.747% X-n916-k207 329179 387367 17.677% 374899 13.889% 353039 7.248% 351887 6.898% 358336 8.857% 350863 6.587% 347313 5.509% 352460 7.072% X-n936-k151 132715 200816 51.314% 161700 21.840% 162903 22.746% 154847 16.676% 153747 15.847% 151238 13.957% 145801 9.860% 153139 15.389% X-n957-k87 85465 126220 47.686% 124190 45.311% 103089 20.621% 108664 27.144% 105588 23.522% 100635 17.750% 101187 18.396% 110763 29.600% X-n979-k58 118976 138987 16.819% 132651 11.494% 129633 8.957% 133201 11.956% 137728 15.761% 127697 7.330% 126903 6.663% 134360 12.930% X-n1001-k43 72355 132976 83.783% 89175 23.246% 85852 18.654% 92974 28.497% 90653 25.287% 82613 14.177% 82012 13.347% 95172 31.535% Avg. Gap ( 501 < 𝑛 ≤ 1001 ) 30.190% 18.918% 12.253% 14.199% 13.344% 9.191% 8.571% 13.555% Avg. Gap 15.863% 11.693% 8.428% 9.230% 8.616% 6.586% 6.074% 8.322% 

experiments, a greedy decoding was used with ×8 instance augmentation. The results, summarized in Table 11, show once again that FiLMMeD variations outperform their non-FiLMMeD counterparts across tha majority of instances. Furthermore, FiLMMeD-CaDA † displays the best average performance, surpassing even the Dual-Branch Distance-Aware (DBDA) method from Jiang et al. (2026), which was specifically designed for cross-distribution generalization. 

A. Corrêa et al. Page 18 of 22 FiLMMeD: Feature-wise Linear Modulation for Cross-Problem MDVRP 

Table 12 

Zero-shot generalization performance on unseen VRP variants. The best MTL results (among neural models) are shown in gray, and the models improved by our approach are underlined. 

HGS-PyVRP OR-Tools MTPOMO MVMoE RouteFinder CaDA FiLMMeD-CaDA CaDA † FiLMMeD-CaDA †

Variant Obj. Gap Obj. Gap Obj. Gap Obj. Gap Obj. Gap Obj. Gap Obj. Gap Obj. Gap Obj. Gap VRPMB 13.54 * 14.93 10.27% 15.04 11.32% 14.99 10.94% 14.88 10.13% 14.83 9.73% 14.65 8.37% 14.62 8.15% 14.60 7.99% OVRPMB 9.01 * 10.59 17.54% 10.87 20.65% 10.85 20.42% 10.72 19.02% 10.58 17.38% 10.51 16.71% 10.47 16.24% 10.39 15.34% VRPMBL 13.78 * 15.42 11.90% 15.41 11.97% 15.33 11.37% 15.18 10.32% 15.05 9.27% 14.97 8.71% 14.93 8.40% 14.95 8.53% VRPMBTW 25.51 * 29.97 17.48% 28.31 11.06% 28.32 11.10% 28.29 10.87% 28.40 11.42% 28.28 10.92% 28.20 10.62% 28.16 10.45% OVRPMBL 9.01 * 10.59 17.54% 10.85 20.43% 10.82 20.14% 10.72 19.01% 10.58 17.41% 10.51 16.72% 10.47 16.24% 10.39 15.37% OVRPMBTW 16.97 * 19.31 13.78% 18.51 9.08% 18.55 9.33% 18.45 8.68% 18.57 9.44% 18.56 9.38% 18.40 8.42% 18.48 8.90% VRPMBLTW 25.85 * 30.44 17.76% 28.73 11.27% 28.70 11.16% 28.65 10.82% 28.75 11.38% 28.62 10.86% 28.51 10.43% 28.48 10.32% OVRPMBLTW 16.97 * 19.31 13.78% 18.51 9.12% 18.55 9.30% 18.45 8.69% 18.57 9.43% 18.55 9.32% 18.40 8.41% 18.48 8.91% MDVRP 11.89 * 12.52 5.27% 16.07 35.74% 16.02 35.35% 15.98 35.02% 17.16 45.33% 14.30 20.69% 13.99 18.06% 14.03 18.43% MDOVRP 7.97 * 8.16 2.33% 10.28 29.06% 10.24 28.59% 10.18 27.82% 9.74 22.31% 9.84 23.70% 10.52 32.18% 10.25 28.73% MDVRPB 11.64 * 12.22 5.01% 15.18 30.66% 15.12 30.13% 15.05 29.53% 17.86 54.31% 14.44 24.38% 13.99 20.48% 14.09 21.34% MDVRPL 11.90 * 12.52 5.24% 16.30 37.58% 16.25 37.17% 16.20 36.76% 17.14 45.04% 14.37 21.27% 14.07 18.64% 14.08 18.70% MDVRPTW 19.33 * 19.62 1.55% 26.68 38.56% 26.67 38.51% 26.51 37.64% 27.18 41.22% 24.12 25.25% 23.28 20.75% 22.83 18.38% MDOVRPTW 13.00 * 13.09 0.74% 17.57 35.67% 17.57 35.68% 17.48 34.96% 17.23 33.02% 15.93 23.03% 15.96 23.17% 15.14 16.76% MDOVRPB 8.69 * 8.87 2.15% 10.94 26.08% 10.89 25.56% 10.82 24.74% 10.93 26.06% 10.53 21.43% 11.21 29.30% 11.01 26.93% MDOVRPL 7.97 * 8.16 2.33% 10.28 29.07% 10.24 28.60% 10.18 27.84% 9.74 22.26% 9.93 24.73% 10.51 32.01% 10.24 28.63% MDVRPBL 11.68 * 12.22 4.66% 15.80 35.54% 15.73 34.95% 15.62 33.98% 17.50 50.52% 14.47 24.15% 14.21 21.86% 14.22 21.96% MDVRPBTW 22.03 * 22.40 1.69% 30.55 39.23% 30.55 39.22% 30.36 38.36% 30.88 40.84% 27.54 25.59% 26.60 21.12% 25.68 16.85% MDVRPLTW 19.35 * 19.66 1.58% 27.13 40.71% 27.12 40.67% 26.93 39.69% 27.63 43.44% 24.24 25.73% 23.32 20.82% 22.86 18.38% MDOVRPBL 8.69 * 8.87 2.13% 10.94 26.11% 10.90 25.66% 10.82 24.78% 10.93 25.99% 10.65 22.85% 11.20 29.13% 11.01 26.90% MDOVRPBTW 14.37 * 14.49 0.87% 19.69 37.62% 19.69 37.62% 19.59 36.95% 19.38 35.44% 17.75 24.09% 17.77 24.10% 16.59 15.71% MDOVRPLTW 13.00 * 13.09 0.70% 17.58 35.70% 17.58 35.74% 17.48 34.95% 17.22 32.99% 15.93 22.98% 15.97 23.27% 15.14 16.76% MDVRPBLTW 22.06 * 22.43 1.70% 31.09 41.52% 31.06 41.39% 30.86 40.49% 31.57 43.84% 27.62 25.79% 26.62 21.04% 25.75 17.04% MDOVRPBLTW 14.37 * 14.49 0.86% 19.69 37.64% 19.69 37.61% 19.60 36.96% 19.38 35.44% 17.78 24.23% 17.77 24.08% 16.59 15.72% MDVRPMB 10.68 * 12.22 14.37% 15.14 42.22% 15.08 41.67% 14.99 40.80% 17.51 65.10% 14.24 33.86% 13.78 29.41% 13.89 30.52% MDOVRPMB 7.66 * 8.88 15.83% 10.91 42.57% 10.90 42.41% 10.77 40.67% 10.78 40.93% 10.42 36.20% 10.97 43.35% 10.78 40.90% MDVRPMBL 10.71 * 12.23 14.23% 15.49 45.23% 15.40 44.37% 15.28 43.27% 16.86 58.45% 14.17 32.82% 13.85 29.77% 13.96 30.83% MDVRPMBTW 19.29 * 22.39 16.12% 28.44 48.01% 28.46 48.12% 28.43 47.93% 29.38 52.98% 26.24 36.64% 24.69 28.37% 24.08 25.14% MDOVRPMBL 7.66 * 8.87 15.73% 10.90 42.45% 10.88 42.13% 10.76 40.62% 10.78 40.91% 10.52 37.47% 10.97 43.42% 10.78 40.83% MDOVRPMBTW 12.96 * 14.49 11.79% 18.56 43.63% 18.61 44.04% 18.49 43.14% 18.70 44.76% 17.19 33.09% 16.66 28.89% 15.86 22.62% MDVRPMBLTW 19.31 * 22.43 16.16% 28.93 50.36% 28.89 50.19% 28.80 49.69% 29.95 55.78% 26.26 36.57% 24.64 27.92% 24.02 24.68% MDOVRPMBLTW 12.96 * 14.49 11.79% 18.56 43.65% 18.60 43.95% 18.50 43.17% 18.70 44.78% 17.20 33.16% 16.66 28.89% 15.86 22.55% Avg. Gap * 9.40% 32.18% 31.97% 31.49% 36.36% 23.46% 23.41% 21.01% 

These experiments indicate that our method has great cross-size and cross-distribution capabilities, despite being pri-marily designed for cross-problem generalization. 

5.7. Results on unseen tasks 

To evaluate the zero-shot generalization capabilities of FiLMMeD-CaDA and FiLMMeD-CaDA †, we conducted further experiments across 32 unseen variants. Following the experimental settings of Berto et al. (2025) and Li et al. (2025), these evaluations were performed on 100-node instances. The test set includes mixed backhauls (MB) and multi-depots (MD), variants that appeared in the settings of Zhou et al. (2024a), but remain unseen to the training protocol established by Berto et al. (2025). The results are summarized in Table 12. Overall, FiLMMeD-CaDA and FiLMMeD-CaDA † consistently improved compared to their counterparts, obtaining a lower average gap. Furthermore, FiLMMeD-CaDA † displayed the best performance across all evaluated neural baselines, consolidating the zero-shot generalization of our method. 

5.8. Performance of the PO algorithm on other models 

To further evaluate the effectiveness of the PO algorithm in the MTL domain, we retrained MTPOMO, MVMoE and RouteFinder (once again, the modern Transformer-based Encoder variant of RouteFinder) using PO and RL. The RL-based models were trained via the standard REINFORCE with shared baselines algorithm. Following the experimental protocol of Berto et al. (2025), the average performance gaps are reported in Table 13. Across all three baselines, the PO algorithm exhibited superior generalization, underscoring even more its viability for future MTL VRP research. More-over, its consistent performance improvements across differ-ent model architectures display great modularity, suggesting the application of PO for MTL is architecture-agnostic rather than tied to a specific model. 

Table 13 

Average gaps across 16 VRP variants: RL vs. PO comparison. Model RL PO MTPOMO 2.354% 2.141% 

MVMoE 2.169% 1.938% 

RouteFinder 2.049% 1.807% 

5.9. Complexity analysis 

In this section, we report the computational overhead of all FiLMMeD variations. The results, reported in Ta-ble 14, show that the FiLM mechanism adds fewer than 0.01M parameters, an increase of less than 1%. Similarly, the combined GPU memory overhead introduced by FiLM and PO remains negligible across all configurations. Additionally, the training times per epoch are nearly identical between FiLMMeD and its counterparts, indicating 

A. Corrêa et al. Page 19 of 22 FiLMMeD: Feature-wise Linear Modulation for Cross-Problem MDVRP 

that PO introduces minimal overhead compared to REIN-FORCE despite its 𝑂 (𝑁 2) complexity in pairwise compar-isons. This efficiency stems from the fact that the preference computation is lightweight relative to the autoregressive decoder’s forward pass. 

Table 14 

Computational complexity analysis.                           

> Model Params (M) Avg. GPU Memory (GB) Avg. Training Epoch Time MTPOMO 1.25 6.55 2m 5s FiLMMeD-MTPOMO 1.26 6.81 2m 9s MVMoE 3.68 9.00 3m 20s FiLMMeD-MVMoE 3.68 9.49 3m 21s CaDA 3.43 5.47 2m 50s FiLMMeD-CaDA 3.43 5.97 2m 49s CaDA †3.56 6.92 3m 34s FiLMMeD-CaDA †3.56 7.74 3m 38s

6. Conclusion 

This paper introduces FiLMMeD, a novel MTL model focused on solving MDVRP variants. FiLMMeD augments the standard encoder architecture used in MTL works with a FiLM-based conditioning mechanism that adapts the model’s internal representations to the specific set of active con-straints in each instance. We demonstrate that this mecha-nism effectively learns a more discriminative latent space of node embeddings, leading to a better generalization. We also propose a CL training strategy that progressively exposes the model to increasingly more complex MDVRP variants, based on the number of constraints. Compared to established training strategies and sampling regimens, our curriculum yielded substantially improved generalization across the 24 tested MDVRP variants. Finally, we explored the use of PO as an alternative to RL to train FiLMMeD on single-depot variants. Across different experimental settings, our results show that PO provides a faster convergence and better generalization, offering an early but compelling signal that PO may be the preferred training paradigm for future MTL routing works. We have confirmed the effectiveness of FiLMMeD through extensive experiments on both multi-and single-depot problems. Additional ablation studies con-firm the isolated impact of each individual contribution. For future work, we envision augmenting the PO algorithm to further improve the generalization of existing methods in the MTL setting. 

CRediT authorship contribution statement 

Arthur Corrêa: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Software, Validation, Visual-ization, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing. 

Paulo Nascimento: Formal analysis, Project administration, Supervision, Writing - review & editing. Samuel Moniz: 

Funding acquisition, Project administration, Supervision, Writing - review & editing. 

Acknowledgements 

This research is sponsored by national funds through FCT - Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia (FCT), Por-tugal, through doctoral grant 2025.00622.BD and projects UID/00285/2025, and LA/P/0112/2020. This work was also supported by the European Union - NextGenerationEU, through the Portuguese Republic’s Recovery and Re-silience Plan Partnership Agreement [project C645808870-00000067], within the scope of the project PRODUTECH R3 – “Agenda Mobilizadora da Fileira das Tecnologias de Produção para a Reindustrialização”, Total project invest-ment: 166.988.013,71 Euros; Total Grant : 97.111.730,27 Euros; and by the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) through the Operational Program for Com-petitiveness and Internationalization (COMPETE 2020) under the project POCI-01-0247-FEDER-046102 (PRO-DUTECH4S&C). 

References 

Bello, I., Pham, H., Le, Q.V., Norouzi, M., Bengio, S., 2017. Neural combi-natorial optimization with reinforcement learning, in: 5th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2017 - Workshop Track Proceedings. Bengio, Y., Lodi, A., Prouvost, A., 2021. Machine learning for com-binatorial optimization: A methodological tour d’horizon. Euro-pean Journal of Operational Research 290, 405–421. URL: https:// www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0377221720306895 , doi: 10. 1016/j.ejor.2020.07.063 .Berto, F., Hua, C., Zepeda, N.G., Hottung, A., Wouda, N., Lan, L., Park, J., Tierney, K., Park, J., 2025. RouteFinder: Towards Foundation Models for Vehicle Routing Problems. Transactions on Machine Learning Research URL: https://openreview.net/forum?id=QzGLoaOPiY .Bi, J., Ma, Y., Zhou, J., Song, W., Cao, Z., Wu, Y., Zhang, J., 2025. Learning to handle complex constraints for vehicle routing problems, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Bogyrbayeva, A., Meraliyev, M., Mustakhov, T., Dauletbayev, B., 2024. Machine learning to solve vehicle routing problems: A survey. Trans. Intell. Transport. Sys. 25, 4754–4772. URL: https://doi.org/10.1109/ TITS.2023.3334976 , doi: 10.1109/TITS.2023.3334976 .Braekers, K., Ramaekers, K., Van Nieuwenhuyse, I., 2016. The vehicle routing problem: State of the art classification and review. Computers & Industrial Engineering 99, 300–313. URL: https: //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360835215004775 ,doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2015.12.007 .Cattaruzza, D., Absi, N., Feillet, D., González-Feliu, J., 2017. Vehicle routing problems for city logistics. EURO Journal on Transportation and Logistics 6, 51–79. doi: 10.1007/s13676-014-0074-0 .Chalumeau, F., Surana, S., Bonnet, C., Grinsztajn, N., Pretorius, A., Lat-erre, A., Barrett, T.D., 2023. Combinatorial optimization with policy adaptation using latent space search, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Chen, X., Tian, Y., 2019. Learning to perform local rewriting for com-binatorial optimization, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Cheng, H., Zheng, H., Cong, Y., Jiang, W., Pu, S., 2023. Select and optimize: Learning to solve large-scale tsp instances, in: Ruiz, F., Dy, J., van de Meent, J.W. (Eds.), Proceedings of The 26th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, PMLR. pp. 1219– 1231. URL: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v206/cheng23a.html .Cordeau, J.F., Gendreau, M., Laporte, G., 1997. A tabu search heuristic for periodic and multi-depot vehicle routing problems. Networks 30, 105–119. 

A. Corrêa et al. Page 20 of 22 FiLMMeD: Feature-wise Linear Modulation for Cross-Problem MDVRP 

Corrêa, A., Silva, C., Xu, L., Brintrup, A., Moniz, S., 2026. Tunensearch: A hybrid transfer learning and local search approach for solving ve-hicle routing problems. Computers & Operations Research 190, 107433. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ S0305054826000511 , doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2026.107433 .Crevier, B., Cordeau, J.F., Laporte, G., 2007. The multi-depot vehicle routing problem with inter-depot routes. European Journal of Operational Research 176, 756–773. URL: https: //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0377221705006983 ,doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2005.08.015 .Drakulic, D., Michel, S., Mai, F., Sors, A., Andreoli, J.M., 2023. BQ-NCO: Bisimulation quotienting for efficient neural combinatorial optimization, in: Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-tems. URL: https://openreview.net/forum?id=BRqlkTDvvm .Elatar, S., Abouelmehdi, K., Riffi, M.E., 2023. The vehicle routing problem in the last decade: variants, taxonomy and metaheuristics. Procedia Computer Science 220, 398–404. URL: https://www.sciencedirect. com/science/article/pii/S1877050923005860 , doi: 10.1016/j.procs.2023. 03.051 . the 14th International Conference on Ambient Systems, Net-works and Technologies Networks (ANT) and The 6th International Conference on Emerging Data and Industry 4.0 (EDI40). Fu, Z.H., Qiu, K.B., Zha, H., 2021. Generalize a small pre-trained model to arbitrarily large tsp instances, in: Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, pp. 7474–7482. Goh, Y.L., Cao, Z., Ma, Y., Zhou, J., Dupty, M.H., Lee, W.S., 2025. SHIELD: Multi-task multi-distribution vehicle routing solver with spar-sity and hierarchy, in: Forty-second International Conference on Ma-chine Learning. URL: https://openreview.net/forum?id=6DJEaz1cCj .Grinsztajn, N., Furelos-Blanco, D., Surana, S., Bonnet, C., Barrett, T.D., 2023. Winner takes it all: Training performant rl populations for com-binatorial optimization, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Ha, D., Dai, A.M., Le, Q.V., 2017. Hypernetworks, in: International Conference on Learning Representations. URL: https://openreview. net/forum?id=rkpACe1lx .Hottung, A., Tierney, K., 2020. Neural large neighborhood search for the capacitated vehicle routing problem, in: European Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 443–450. doi: 10.3233/FAIA200124 .Hou, Q., Yang, J., Su, Y., Wang, X., Deng, Y., 2023. Generalize learned heuristics to solve large-scale vehicle routing problems in real-time, in: The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations. Huang, Z., Zhou, J., Cao, Z., XU, Y., 2025. Rethinking light decoder-based solvers for vehicle routing problems, in: The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations. URL: https://openreview. net/forum?id=4pRwkYpa2u .Hudson, B., Li, Q., Malencia, M., Prorok, A., 2022. Graph neural network guided local search for the traveling salesperson problem, in: ICLR 2022 - 10th International Conference on Learning Representations. Jiang, Y.B., Tao, D.Y., Chen, W.J., Xu, F.R., 2026. Dual-branch distance-aware neural solver for cross-distribution vehicle routing problems. Neurocomputing 679, 133239. URL: https: //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0925231226006363 ,doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2026.133239 .Kim, M., Park, J., Kim, J., 2021. Learning collaborative policies to solve np-hard routing problems, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 10418–10430. Kim, M., Park, J., Park, J., 2022. Sym-nco: Leveraging symmetricity for neural combinatorial optimization, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Kool, W., van Hoof, H., Welling, M., 2019. Attention, learn to solve routing problems!, in: 7th International Conference on Learning Representa-tions, ICLR 2019. Kwon, Y.D., Choo, J., Kim, B., Yoon, I., Gwon, Y., Min, S., 2020. Pomo: Policy optimization with multiple optima for reinforcement learning, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Lei, K., Guo, P., Wang, Y., Wu, X., Zhao, W., 2022. Solve routing problems with a residual edge-graph attention neural network. Neurocomputing 508, 79–98. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/ pii/S092523122200978X , doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2022.08. 005 .Li, H., Liu, F., Zheng, Z., Zhang, Y., Wang, Z., 2025. CaDA: Cross-problem routing solver with constraint-aware dual-attention, in: Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning. URL: https: //openreview.net/forum?id=CS4RyQuTig .Li, J., Tian Dai, B., Niu, Y., Xiao, J., Wu, Y., 2024. Multi-type attention for solving multi-depot vehicle routing problems. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 25, 17831–17840. doi: 10.1109/TITS. 2024.3413077 .Li, S., Yan, Z., Wu, C., 2021. Learning to delegate for large-scale vehicle routing. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34, 26198–26211. Li, Y., Chu, F., Feng, C., Chu, C., Zhou, M.C., 2019. Integrated production inventory routing planning for intelligent food logistics systems. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 20, 867–878. doi: 10. 1109/TITS.2018.2835145 .Liao, Z., Chen, J., Wang, D., Zhang, Z., Wang, J., 2025. BOPO: Neu-ral combinatorial optimization via best-anchored and objective-guided preference optimization, in: Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning. URL: https://openreview.net/forum?id=FLy6yXdrlW .Liu, F., Lin, X., Wang, Z., Zhang, Q., Xialiang, T., Yuan, M., 2024. Multi-task learning for routing problem with cross-problem zero-shot generalization, in: Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 1898–1908. doi: 10.1145/3637528.3672040 .Liu, S., Cao, Z., Feng, S., Ong, Y.S., 2025. A mixed-curvature based pre-training paradigm for multi-task vehicle routing solver, in: Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning. URL: https: //openreview.net/forum?id=JsPyLqCgks .Lyu, W., Wang, H., Hong, Z., Wang, G., Yang, Y., Liu, Y., Zhang, D., 2023. Rede: Exploring relay transportation for efficient last-mile delivery, in: 2023 IEEE 39th International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE), pp. 3003–3016. doi: 10.1109/ICDE55515.2023.00230 .Ma, Y., Cao, Z., Chee, Y.M., 2023. Learning to search feasible and infeasible regions of routing problems with flexible neural k-opt, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Ma, Y., Li, J., Cao, Z., Song, W., Zhang, L., Chen, Z., Tang, J., 2021. Learn-ing to iteratively solve routing problems with dual-aspect collaborative transformer, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 11096–11107. van der Maaten, L., Hinton, G., 2008. Visualizing data using t-SNE. Journal of Machine Learning Research 9, 2579–2605. URL: http://www.jmlr. org/papers/v9/vandermaaten08a.html .Mazyavkina, N., Sviridov, S., Ivanov, S., Burnaev, E., 2021. Reinforcement learning for combinatorial optimization: A survey. doi: 10.1016/j.cor. 2021.105400 .Nazari, M., Oroojlooy, A., Takáč, M., Snyder, L.V., 2018. Reinforcement learning for solving the vehicle routing problem, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 9839–9849. Pan, M., Lin, G., Luo, Y.W., Zhu, B., Dai, Z., Sun, L., Yuan, C., 2025a. Preference optimization for combinatorial optimization problems, in: Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning. URL: 

> https://openreview.net/forum?id=Jwe5FJ8QGx

.Pan, Y., Cao, Z., GU, C., Liu, L., Zhao, P., Chen, Y., Lin, F., 2025b. Multi-task vehicle routing solver via mixture of specialized experts under state-decomposable MDP, in: The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. URL: https://openreview.net/forum? id=ezSyZM6Lp7 .Perez, E., Strub, F., de Vries, H., Dumoulin, V., Courville, A., 2018. Film: visual reasoning with a general conditioning layer, in: Proceedings of the Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Thirtieth Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence Conference and Eighth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence, AAAI Press. Pessoa, A., Sadykov, R., Uchoa, E., Vanderbeck, F., 2020. A generic exact solver for vehicle routing and related problems. Mathematical Programming 183, 483–523. doi: 10.1007/s10107-020-01523-z .

A. Corrêa et al. Page 21 of 22 FiLMMeD: Feature-wise Linear Modulation for Cross-Problem MDVRP 

Pillac, V., Gendreau, M., Guéret, C., Medaglia, A.L., 2013. Areview of dynamic vehicle routing problems. European Journal of Operational Research 225, 1–11. URL: https: //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0377221712006388 ,doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2012.08.015 .Ramos, T.R.P., Gomes, M.I., Barbosa-Póvoa, A.P., 2020. A new matheuris-tic approach for the multi-depot vehicle routing problem with inter-depot routes. OR Spectrum 42, 75–110. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/ s00291-019-00568-7 , doi: 10.1007/s00291-019-00568-7 .Roberto, P., Costa, O.D., Rhuggenaath, J., Zhang, Y., Akcay, A., 2020. Learning 2-opt heuristics for the traveling salesman problem via deep reinforcement learning, in: Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 465–480. Shazeer, N., 2020. Glu variants improve transformer. URL: https://arxiv. org/abs/2002.05202 , arXiv:2002.05202 .Uchoa, E., Pecin, D., Pessoa, A., Poggi, M., Vidal, T., Subramanian, A., 2017. New benchmark instances for the capacitated vehicle routing problem. European Journal of Operational Research 257, 845–858. doi: 10.1016/j.ejor.2016.08.012 .Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N.M., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A.N., Kaiser, L., Polosukhin, I., 2017. Attention is all you need, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 5999–6009. Vinyals, O., Fortunato, M., Jaitly, N., 2015. Pointer networks, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 2692–2700. Wang, Y., Jia, Y.H., Chen, W.N., Mei, Y., 2025. Soft parameter sharing model for cross-problem generalization in vehicle routing problems. IEEE Transactions on Artificial Intelligence , 1–15doi: 10.1109/TAI. 2025.3576336 .Wang, Z., Sheu, J.B., 2019. Vehicle routing problem with drones. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 122, 350– 364. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ S0191261518307884 , doi: 10.1016/j.trb.2019.03.005 .Wouda, N.A., Lan, L., Kool, W., 2024. PyVRP: a high-performance VRP solver package. INFORMS Journal on Computing 36, 943–955. URL: 

> https://doi.org/10.1287/ijoc.2023.0055

, doi: 10.1287/ijoc.2023.0055 .Wu, Y., Song, W., Cao, Z., Zhang, J., Lim, A., 2022. Learning improvement heuristics for solving routing problems. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems 33, 5057–5069. doi: 10.1109/TNNLS. 2021.3068828 .Ye, H., Wang, J., Liang, H., Cao, Z., Li, Y., Li, F., 2024. Glop: Learning global partition and local construction for solving large-scale routing problems in real-time, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. Yu, T., Kumar, S., Gupta, A., Levine, S., Hausman, K., Finn, C., 2020. Gradient surgery for multi-task learning, in: Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, Curran Associates Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA. Zhang, B., Sennrich, R., 2019. Root mean square layer normalization. Curran Associates Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA. Zhang, Y., Yang, Q., 2022. A survey on multi-task learning. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 34, 5586–5609. doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2021.3070203 .Zheng, Y., Luo, F., Wang, Z., Wu, Y., Zhou, Y., 2025. MTL-KD: Multi-task learning via knowledge distillation for generalizable neural vehi-cle routing solver, in: The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. URL: https://openreview.net/forum? id=rlH3e7VlY8 .Zheng, Z., Zhou, C., Xialiang, T., Yuan, M., Wang, Z., 2024. Udc: A unified neural divide-and-conquer framework for large-scale combinato-rial optimization problems. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37, 6081–6125. Zhou, J., Cao, Z., Wu, Y., Song, W., Ma, Y., Zhang, J., Xu, C., 2024a. Mvmoe: Multi-task vehicle routing solver with mixture-of-experts. Pro-ceedings of Machine Learning Research , 61804–61824. Zhou, J., Wu, Y., Cao, Z., Song, W., Zhang, J., Shen, Z., 2024b. Collabora-tion! towards robust neural methods for routing problems, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 121731–121764. Zhou, J., Wu, Y., Song, W., Cao, Z., Zhang, J., 2023. Towards omni-generalizable neural methods for vehicle routing problems, in: Proceed-ings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 42769–42789. Zong, Z., Wang, H., Wang, J., Zheng, M., Li, Y., 2022. Rbg: Hierarchically solving large-scale routing problems in logistic systems via reinforce-ment learning, in: Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 4648–4658. 

A. Corrêa et al. Page 22 of 22