Title: Approximation algorithms for satisfiable and nearly satisfiable ordering CSPs

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.30020v1

Published Time: Wed, 01 Apr 2026 01:22:27 GMT

Number of Pages: 64

Markdown Content:
# Approximation algorithms for satisfiable and nearly satisfiable ordering CSPs 

Yury Makarychev Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago 

Abstract 

We study approximation algorithms for satisfiable and nearly satisfiable instances of ordering con-straint satisfaction problems (ordering CSPs). Ordering CSPs arise naturally in ranking and scheduling, yet their approximability remains poorly understood beyond a few isolated cases. Apart from tractable cases in which satisfiable instances can be solved exactly in polynomial time, prior nontrivial guarantees in the satisfiable regime were known only for Betweenness, while prior algorithms in the nearly satisfi-able regime applied only to bounded-arity precedence CSPs – CSPs whose constraints are conjunctions of clauses of the form xi < x j .We introduce a general framework for designing approximation algorithms for ordering CSPs. The framework relaxes an input instance to an auxiliary ordering CSP, solves the relaxation, and then applies a randomized transformation to obtain an ordering for the original instance. This reduces the search for approximation algorithms to an optimization problem over randomized transformations. Our main technical contribution is to show that the power of this framework is captured by a struc-tured class of transformations, which we call strong IDU transformations: every transformation used in the framework can be replaced by a strong IDU transformation without weakening the resulting approx-imation guarantee. We then classify strong IDU transformations and show that optimizing over them reduces to an explicit optimization problem whose dimension depends only on the maximum predicate arity k and the desired precision δ > 0. As a consequence, for any finite ordering constraint language, we can compute a strong IDU transformation whose guarantee is within δ of the best guarantee achievable by the framework, in time depending only on k and δ.The framework applies broadly and yields nontrivial approximation guarantees for a wide class of ordering predicates; the following arity-4 results illustrate its scope. Among NP-hard ordering CSPs defined by a single predicate of arity 4, we show that at least 15 051 CSPs admit nontrivial approxima-tion in the satisfiable regime. Moreover, among NP-hard and polynomial-time solvable single-predicate ordering CSPs of arity 4 – excluding bounded-arity precedence CSPs – at least 843 predicates admit nontrivial approximation in the nearly satisfiable regime. Specifically, given a (1 − ε)-satisfiable in-stance, our algorithm produces an ordering that satisfies at least an α − O(ε log n log log n) fraction of the constraints, where α > α random depends only on the predicate. 

1

> arXiv:2603.30020v1 [cs.DS] 31 Mar 2026

# Contents 

1 Introduction 4

1.1 Ordering CSPs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41.2 Overview of our framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

2 Technical overview of IDU transformations 83 Applying the framework to satisfiable and nearly satisfiable ordering CSPs 12 

3.1 Results for single-predicate ordering CSPs of arity 3 and 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 3.2 Completely satisfiable instances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 3.3 Nearly satisfiable instances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 

4 Preliminaries 16 

4.1 Permutons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 4.2 Pattern density sums . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 4.3 Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 

5 IDU transformations 19 

5.1 I, D, and U permutons and their up-combinations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 5.2 Consistency of strong IDU transformations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 

6 From weak to strong IDU transformations 21 

6.1 From a weak IDU transformation σ to a random permuton W . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 6.2 From W to a strong IDU transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 

7 Classification of strong IDU transformations 25 

7.1 Core IDU permutons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 7.2 Proof of Theorem 7.3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27 

8 Approximating arbitrary permutons by IDU and ID combinations 30 9 A quasisymmetric polynomial characterization of profiles 32 10 Equivalence in the density of permutations with matching inverse up–down signatures 36 11 Computing a nearly optimal strong IDU transformation 42 12 Simple sufficient condition for nontrivial approximation 43 13 Flag algebras for strong IDU transformations 45 

13.1 Overview of flag algebras for permutations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45 13.2 Flag algebras and semidefinite programming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47 13.3 Flag algebra for strong IDU transformations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48 

14 Analysis of ordering CSPs of arity 3 and 4 49 

14.1 Ordering CSPs of arity 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49 14.2 Two examples of ordering CSPs of arity 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52 215 Proofs of the main flag algebra results for strong IDU transformations 55 

15.1 Multiplication of flags for T -permutons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55 15.2 Proof of Theorem 13.7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57 

A Shuffle-closed predicates 63 

31 Introduction 

1.1 Ordering CSPs 

In this paper, we develop a general framework for designing approximation algorithms for satisfiable and nearly satisfiable instances of ordering constraint satisfaction problems (ordering CSPs). There is an ex-tensive literature on the approximability of CSPs over finite domains, ranging from the classification of polynomially tractable CSPs [12, 46, 42], to Raghavendra’s general framework for approximating arbitrary maximization CSPs [39], to nontrivial approximation algorithms for NP-hard CSPs (see, e.g., [21, 29, 3, 16, 31, 10, 11]), including algorithms for satisfiable and nearly satisfiable instances (see, e.g., [21, 47, 45, 1, 14, 17, 6, 7]). In addition, there are results on approximation-resistant predicates [2, 28, 13]. See the survey [32] for further details and references. However, there are only a few positive results on the approximability of ordering CSPs. Recall the definition of an ordering CSP. 

Definition 1.1 (Ordering CSP) . An ordering predicate (or relation ) φ(x1, . . . , x k) of arity k is a disjunction of clauses of the form 

xi1 < x i2 < · · · < x it .

where i1, . . . , i t ∈ [k] are distinct and t ≥ 2. A constraint language is a collection of such ordering predicates (different predicates in the language may have different arities). For a constraint language Π, we define the corresponding ordering CSP CSP(Π) as follows. An instance of the problem consists of variables x1, . . . , x n and a set of constraints over them, where each constraint is of the form 

φ(xi1 , . . . , x ik ) for some φ ∈ Π.

A solution to the instance is a permutation π on [n]. A constraint φ is said to be satisfied by π if the assignment xi = π(i) satisfies φ. The objective is to maximize the number of satisfied constraints. An instance is said to be α-satisfiable if there exists a solution satisfying at least an α-fraction of the constraints. An instance is completely satisfiable if it is 1-satisfiable, that is, there exists a permutation satisfying all constraints. A key reason for the scarcity of positive results is the hardness result of Guruswami, Håstad, Manokaran, Raghavendra, and Charikar [22], who showed that, under the Unique Games Conjecture, ordering CSPs are approximation resistant in the following sense: for every ordering CSP and every constant ε > 0, no polynomial-time algorithm can, given an instance that is at least (1 − ε)-satisfiable, find a solution satisfying more than an αrandom + ε fraction of constraints, where αrandom denotes the expected fraction of constraints satisfied by a random ordering. Thus, nontrivial approximation is ruled out for every fixed constant ε > 0.However, this still leaves open completely satisfiable instances and, more generally, the asymptotic regime in which ε tends to 0 as n → ∞ .At the same time, a remarkable result by Bodirsky and Kára provides a classification of temporal CSPs – a generalization of ordering CSPs, precisely characterizing which temporal CSPs are polynomially tractable and which are NP-hard [8]. In particular, it yields a complete classification of polynomially tractable order-ing CSPs. Given an ordering CSP CSP(Π) , the result of Bodirsky–Kára determines whether we can solve 

completely satisfiable instances of CSP(Π) exactly in polynomial time (assuming P̸ = NP ). Against this background, two basic questions remain wide open: • Nontrivial Approximation for Completely Satisfiable CSPs. If an ordering CSP P is not poly-nomially tractable, can we obtain a nontrivial approximation – that is, one achieving a value strictly above αrandom – for completely satisfiable instances of P ?4• Nontrivial Approximation for Nearly Satisfiable CSPs. For a given ordering CSP P (whether or not polynomially tractable), can we obtain a nontrivial approximation for (1 − ε)-satisfiable instances of P , where ε = 1 /polylog( n)?There are two known results addressing these questions. First, there is a 1/2-approximation algorithm for completely satisfiable instances of Betweenness (an ordering CSP of arity 3) due to Chor and Sudan [18]; a simpler combinatorial 1/2-approximation was later given in our previous work [34] (a random ordering achieves αrandom = 1/3). Second, there is an O(log n log log n)-approximation algorithm for the Minimum Feedback Arc Set problem: Seymour [43] established an upper bound on the LP integrality gap, and Even, Naor, Schieber, and Sudan [20] used this to obtain a polynomial-time algorithm that explicitly constructs an ordering. In CSP terms, this algorithm applies to nearly satisfiable instances of the ordering CSP with the less-than predicate x1 < x 2: given a (1 − ε)-satisfiable instance, it finds a solution satisfying at least a 

1 − O(ε log n log log n) fraction of the constraints. 

Definition 1.2. We say that a predicate is a precedence predicate if it is a conjunction of clauses of the form 

xi < x j . An ordering CSP CSP(Π) is a bounded-arity precedence CSP if it has a finite constraint language and every predicate in Π is a precedence predicate. The algorithm for the Minimum Feedback Arc Set problem extends to bounded-arity precedence CSPs: in (1 − ε)-satisfiable instances, it satisfies at least a 1 − O(ε log n log log n) fraction of constraints. The constant in the big-O notation depends on the maximum arity of the predicates in the constraint language. We also note that there are approximation results for ordering CSPs in several restricted settings, includ-ing bounded-occurrence ordering CSPs [23, 30] and approximation above the average [15, 24, 33]. 

1.2 Overview of our framework 

The principal contribution of this work is a new framework for approximating ordering CSPs, together with structural results that make the framework algorithmically usable. We develop this framework to address the two questions above and conjecture that optimal approximation algorithms for both problems fall within it . While we apply the framework here only to these questions, it can also be used in other settings, for example, to design approximation algorithms for bounded-occurrence ordering CSPs. We apply our techniques to ordering CSPs of arity 4 defined by a single predicate. Among NP-hard single-predicate arity-4 ordering CSPs, we prove that at least 15 051 non-isomorphic predicates admit a nontrivial approximation for completely satisfiable instances. In the nearly satisfiable regime, at least 

843 such predicates admit nontrivial approximation (excluding bounded-arity precedence CSPs, see Defi-nition 1.2). We now outline the main ideas underlying our framework and introduce the necessary definitions. 

Definition 1.3. We say that a predicate φ′ is a relaxation of a predicate φ of the same arity if every as-signment satisfying φ also satisfies φ′, or, equivalently, if φ(x1, . . . , x k) implies φ′(x1, . . . , x k). Given a constraint language Π, fix a relaxation φ′ for every predicate φ ∈ Π, and let Π′ = {φ′ : φ ∈ Π} denote the resulting constraint language, which we call the relaxation of Π.Consider the corresponding maximization promise constraint satisfaction problem MaxPCSP(Π , Π′)

defined as follows: given an instance I of CSP(Π) , replace every constraint φ with its relaxation φ′ in Π′.Now, the goal is to find a solution maximizing the number of satisfied constraints in the resulting instance I′

of CSP(Π ′); we will refer to I′ as the relaxation of I. (We note that the correspondence φ 7 → φ′ is implicit in our notation.) Observe that if the original instance is α-satisfiable, then so is its relaxation. Importantly, if CSP(Π ′)

is polynomially tractable (that is, completely satisfiable instances of CSP(Π ′) can be solved exactly in 5polynomial time), 1 then a relaxation of every satisfiable instance of CSP(Π) can also be solved exactly in polynomial time. We now introduce the notion of a transformation that, together with its strengthening, plays a key role in our framework. 

Definition 1.4. A weak IDU transformation is a collection of random permutations {σi}i∈N, with one random permutation σn defined for every n. We will refer to this IDU transformation simply as σ.This definition is only a starting point. We will soon impose additional properties and arrive at a much more structured class of transformations, called strong IDU transformations . We are now ready to outline our general approach. 1. First, we identify an appropriate relaxation φ′ for every predicate φ ∈ Π, obtaining a relaxed con-straint language Π′. While we will discuss this step in more detail later (see Sections 3.2 and 3.3), a natural choice is to take predicates φ′ from a constraint language defining a polynomially tractable ordering CSP (as mentioned above, such languages are classified explicitly by Bodirsky and Kára). 2. Given an instance of CSP(Π) , consider its relaxation in CSP(Π ′). Solve this instance exactly or approximately using an appropriate algorithm for CSP(Π ′), and obtain a solution π.3. Apply a random IDU transformation to π and output σnπ (the composition of permutations σn and 

π). That is, each variable xi is assigned to position σn(π(i)) , where n is the number of variables in the instance. 

Example 1.5. We provide a simple example to illustrate this algorithm. Consider the constraint language with a single predicate φ of arity 4 and the corresponding CSP( φ):

φ(x1, x 2, x 3, x 4) = ( x1 < x 2 < x 3 < x 4) ∨ (x1 < x 3 < x 2 < x 4) ∨

(x2 < x 1 < x 4 < x 3) ∨ (x2 < x 4 < x 1 < x 3).

Since x2 < x 4 holds in all clauses, φ′(x1, x 2, x 3, x 4) = ( x2 < x 4) is a valid relaxation of φ. Note that φ′ is simply the less-than constraint with two dummy variables. Thus, solving satisfiable instances of CSP( φ′) reduces to topological sorting. However, the obtained solution π itself may not provide any approximation for the original instance. Therefore, we apply the following transformation: we randomly and independently assign each xi the value of either π(i) or π(i) + n, with probability 1/2 for each choice. This yields an injective map π′ : {1, . . . , n } → { 1, . . . , 2n} (see Figure 1). The final assignment π′′ is obtained by replacing the values of π′ with their relative ranks in {π′(1) , . . . , π ′(n)}. Using the framework developed in this paper, it is easy to show that this algorithm satisfies an α = 1/4 fraction of all constraints in expectation, while a random ordering satisfies only an αrandom = 1/6 fraction of all constraints. 

From weak to strong IDU transformations The most nontrivial step in our framework is choosing an appropriate IDU transformation σ. Assume that our algorithm for CSP(Π ′) satisfies an s-fraction of all constraints in Step 2. We first derive a formula for the fraction of constraints in the original CSP(Π) 

instance that are satisfied by our algorithm. We show that this fraction is at least p(Π ′ → Π, σ) s, where 

p(Π ′ → Π, σ) is characterized in terms of certain restricted pattern densities of permutations in σ.However, the set of all weak IDU transformations is enormous. In general, weak IDU transformations do not admit finite – let alone succinct – descriptions, so there is no straightforward way to optimize over 

> 1For ordering CSPs, there is no distinction between the polynomial-time tractability of the decision and search variants: if there is a polynomial-time algorithm for one, then there is also a polynomial-time algorithm for the other.

6x3 x5 x1 x6 x2 x4

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 

Figure 1: The figure shows the transformation from Example 1.5. Each xi is randomly mapped to either 

π(i) or π(i) + n.them in order to find an optimal or even nearly optimal transformation. To address this issue, we introduce a much more structured class of strong IDU transformations. For this class, the formula for p(Π ′ → Π, σ)

takes a simpler form, expressed in terms of standard (not restricted) pattern densities . This naturally raises the question of whether strong IDU transformations are as powerful as general ones for our purposes. We answer this affirmatively by showing that for every weak IDU transformation σ, there exists a strong IDU transformation σ′ such that 

p(Π ′ → Π, σ′) ≥ p(Π ′ → Π, σ)

simultaneously for all Π and Π′. Hence, for the purposes of our framework, there is no loss of generality in 

restricting attention to strong IDU transformations .We then classify all strong IDU transformations, giving a concrete description of the transformations that matter for our framework. We show that each strong IDU transformation can be represented as a random permuton constructed from the basic permutons I (identity), D (decreasing), and U (uniform) via a simple operation called up-combination , which we introduce in this paper. Moreover, every strong IDU transformation can be approximated arbitrarily well by finite up-combinations of I, D, and U or even by combinations of I and D alone. Using these notions, we develop an algebraic characterization of p(Π ′ →

Π, σ), thereby reducing the problem of maximizing p(Π ′ → Π, σ) to that of maximizing certain multivariate polynomials. As a corollary, we show how to find a nearly optimal strong IDU transformation ˆσ such that 

p(Π ′ → Π, ˆσ) ≥ p(Π ′ → Π, σ) − ε

for every weak IDU transformation σ, in time f (k, 1/ε ), where k is the maximum arity of predicates in Π.We provide a technical overview of IDU transformations in Section 2. The remaining ingredient is the choice of the relaxation Π′.

Relaxation for completely satisfiable instances By the Bodirsky–Kára classification, an ordering con-straint satisfaction problem CSP(Π) is polynomially tractable if and only if all predicates in Π are shuffle-closed or dual-shuffle-closed (we provide the necessary background in Section 3.2; these details are not essential for the current discussion). Accordingly, there are two canonical tractable relaxations of CSP(Π) :one with Π′ = Π L, obtained by replacing each predicate φ with its L-relaxation φL, namely the closure of 

φ under the shuffle-operation, and the other with Π′ = Π R, obtained by replacing each predicate with its 

R-relaxation φR, namely the closure of φ under the dual-shuffle-operation. Both ΠL and ΠR can be effi-ciently computed from Π. As the corresponding CSPs – CSP(Π L) and CSP(Π R) – can be solved exactly in polynomial time, the only remaining step is to choose an appropriate IDU transformation. 

Relaxation for nearly satisfiable instances The only known algorithm for nearly satisfiable instances of any ordering CSP is the algorithm for the Minimum Feedback Arc Set problem [20, 43]. Using this algorithm, we can satisfy a 1 − O(ε log n log log n) fraction of constraints in (1 − ε)-satisfiable instances 7of bounded-arity precedence CSPs (see Definition 1.2). Accordingly, given a (1 − ε)-satisfiable instance of 

CSP(Π) , we replace each predicate φ ∈ Π with a precedence-constraint relaxation φ′; among all possible choices, we select the one with the minimal set of satisfying assignments (by inclusion). It is easy to see that such a predicate φ′ exists and that every other precedence-constraint relaxation of φ is also a relaxation of φ′. We thus obtain an instance of CSP(Π ′), solve it using the approximation algorithm for the Minimum Feedback Arc Set problem, and obtain a solution π satisfying at least a 1 − O(ε log n log log n) fraction of constraints. Finally, we apply an appropriate IDU transformation to π and output the resulting ordering. We formally present our results for ordering CSPs, which rely on our framework, in Section 3. 

Related work The most important and relevant results for ordering CSPs are the aforementioned ones: the classification of ordering CSPs by Bodirsky and Kára [8], the hardness of approximation result for order-ing CSPs by Guruswami, Håstad, Manokaran, Raghavendra, and Charikar [22], and the 1/2-approximation algorithm by Chor and Sudan [18]. In terms of the approach, our framework is an extension of the algorithm for Betweenness proposed by us in [34]. In [34], we proposed to relax Betweenness constraints, solve the resulting CSP, and then run a postprocessing step that transforms the solution for the relaxation into one for Betweenness. Importantly, the latter transformation step in [34] was ad hoc and can only in retrospect be interpreted as equivalent to applying a strong IDU transformation (namely, 12 I 12 D). The objective of our framework is analogous to that of Raghavendra for not-necessarily-satisfiable in-stances of classical CSPs [39] and to the ongoing project by Bhangale, Khot, and Minzer for completely satisfiable instances (see [7] and references therein). However, in comparison to these results, we focus on algorithms rather than hardness. Our negative results only show that certain CSPs cannot be solved using our framework and do not rule out the existence of other polynomial-time algorithms. On the positive side, our algorithm for computing a near-optimal approximation factor within our frame-work is practical: for most CSPs of arity 4, its Python implementation is able to find a good rounding scheme in seconds to minutes on a modern laptop. Finally, we note that the idea of replacing constraints with new constraints (their relaxations in our terminology) also appears in the algorithm for satisfiable instances of Max k-LIN in non-Abelian groups by Bhangale and Khot [6] (the authors attribute the algorithm to folklore): their algorithm replaces the k-LIN equations over the original non-Abelian group with corresponding constraints in the Abelian quotient group G/ [G, G ] (where [G, G ] is the commutator subgroup of G), solves the resulting instance exactly using Gaussian elimination, and finally “randomly lifts” the solution to G.

# 2 Technical overview of IDU transformations 

Our technical focus is on IDU transformations. We first discuss the properties of IDU transformations that are important for our applications. 

Definition 2.1. For a predicate φ of arity k, let Sat( φ) denote the set of all permutations on [k] that satisfy φ.Note that φ′ is a relaxation of φ if and only if Sat( φ) ⊆ Sat( φ′).8Definition 2.2. Given a permutation π on [n] and a subset of indices J = {j1, . . . , j k} ⊆ [n] with j1 <j2 < · · · < j k, we define the pattern of π at positions J as the permutation τ on [k] that is order-isomorphic to the sequence π(j1), π (j2), . . . , π (jk). In other words, for every a, b ∈ [k], we have τ (a) < τ (b) if and only if π(ja) < π (jb). We denote it by patt( π, J ).Further, given a sequence of points (xi, y i) with all xi and all yi distinct, the pattern of the sequence is the permutation τ ∈ Sk that is order-isomorphic to the sequence of y-coordinates obtained after sorting the points by increasing x-coordinates. This definition also applies to sequences of distinct numbers: the pattern of (a1, . . . , a k) is defined as the pattern of the points (1 , a 1), (2 , a 2), . . . , (k, a k).Consider a constraint φ(xjβ(1) , . . . , x jβ(k) ), where j1 < · · · < j k and β is a permutation on [k]. Let 

J = {j1, . . . , j k}. The constraint is satisfied by a permutation π if and only if the pattern of the sequence 

(π(jβ(1) ), . . . , π (jβ(k))) is in Sat( φ). This can be written as patt( π, J ) β ∈ Sat( φ) or, equivalently, 

patt( π, J ) ∈ Sat( φ)β−1 = {ρβ −1 : ρ ∈ Sat( φ)}. (1) Going back to our algorithm, assume we use a weak IDU transformation {σn} to solve an instance 

I of CSP(Π) . Suppose we have found a solution π for the relaxation I′ of I. Consider a constraint 

φ(xjβ(1) , . . . , x jβ(k) ). Assume that its relaxation φ′(xjβ(1) , . . . , x jβ(k) ) is satisfied by π. Our goal is to analyze the probability that φ(xjβ(1) , . . . , x jβ(k) ) is satisfied by the permuted solution σnπ. Note that 

patt( σnπ, J ) = patt( σn, J ′) patt( π, J ),

where J′ = π(J) = {π(j1), . . . , π (jk)}. Accordingly, 

Pr( φ(xjβ(1) , . . . , x jβ(k) ) is satisfied ) = Pr(patt( σnπ, J ) ∈ Sat( φ)β−1)= Pr(patt( σn, J ′) · patt( π, J ) ∈ Sat( φ)β−1)= Pr(patt( σn, J ′) ∈ Sat( φ) · (patt( π, J )β)−1)= Pr(patt( σn, J ′) ∈ Sat( φ) · τ −10 ),

where τ0 = patt( π, J )β. Since φ′ is satisfied by π, by (1), we have τ0 ∈ Sat( φ′). We get, 

Pr( φ(xjβ(1) , . . . , x jβ(k) ) is satisfied ) ≥ min   

> τ∈Sat( φ′)

Pr ( patt( σn, J ′) ∈ Sat( φ)τ −1).

Definition 2.3. Define the restricted pattern density dJ (τ, σ n) as the probability that patt( σn, J ) = τ (over the randomness of σn), and let the (standard) pattern density d(τ, σ n) be its expectation over a uniformly random k-subset J ⊆ [n] (i.e., J is sampled uniformly without replacement from {1, . . . , n }). We will often refer to both quantities simply as pattern densities. Then the probability that the constraint φ(xjβ(1) , . . . , x jβ(k) ) is satisfied is at least 

p(φ′ → φ, σ) def 

= inf  

> n≥k

min 

> J⊆[n]
> |J|=k

min  

> τ∈Sat( φ′)

∑ 

> ρ∈Sat( φ)τ−1

dJ (ρ, σ n).

Let p(Π ′ → Π, σ) = min φ∈Π p(φ′ → φ, σ). Since the bound above holds for every satisfied con-straint φ′(xjβ(1) , . . . , x jβ(k) ), the expected number of satisfied constraints in the final solution σnπ is at least p(Π ′ → Π, σ) times the number of satisfied constraints in π. The above argument yields the following performance guarantee for our framework. 9Theorem 2.4. Consider CSP(Π) and a relaxation Π′ of Π. Assume that there is a polynomial-time al-gorithm that, given a c-satisfiable instance of CSP(Π) , finds a solution satisfying at least an s fraction of constraints in the corresponding relaxed instance of CSP(Π ′). Further, assume that there exists a weak IDU transformation {σn} that can be sampled in polynomial time. Then there is a polynomial-time algo-rithm that, given a c-satisfiable instance of CSP(Π) , finds a solution that satisfies, in expectation, at least a 

p(Π ′ → Π, σ) · s fraction of constraints. 

In our applications of this theorem, we will have c = 1 and s = 1 for completely satisfiable instances and 

c = 1 −ε and s = 1 −O(ε log n log log n) for nearly satisfiable instances (as discussed above). Theorem 2.4 highlights the importance of the restricted pattern densities dJ (ρ, σ n), which fully describe the performance of the weak IDU transformation σ in our framework. However, analyzing these quantities for an arbitrary weak IDU transformation appears to be quite challenging. It is considerably easier to handle them within a more structured family of transformations – namely, those for which the values of dJ (ρ, σ n) do not depend on the choice of J. This observation motivates the following definition. 

Definition 2.5. A strong IDU transformation is a weak IDU transformation {σn} that satisfies the following property: for every k and permutation ρ ∈ Sk, the value dJ (ρ, σ n) is the same for all n ≥ k and all J ⊆ [n]

of size k. In particular, dJ (ρ, σ n) = d(ρ, σ n). Since this quantity does not depend on n (for n ≥ k), we denote it simply by d(ρ, σ).For a strong IDU transformation, we obtain a simpler expression for p(φ′ → φ, σ):

p(φ′ → φ, σ) = min   

> τ∈Sat( φ′)
> ∑
> ρ∈Sat( φ)τ−1

d(ρ, σ).

However, it is not immediately clear how rich the class of strong IDU transformations is, or whether they are as powerful as weak IDU transformations for our purposes. The main structural results about IDU transformations are as follows. First, we connect weak IDU transformations with random permutons , the limit objects for random permutations (see Section 4.1 for the definition of a permuton). Each random permuton defines a weak IDU transformation, and although the converse is not true, we show that such transformations are as powerful for our purposes as arbitrary weak IDU transformations. We then show that for every weak IDU transformation σ, there exists a strong IDU transformation ˆσ

such that for any predicate φ and any relaxation φ′ of φ:

p(φ′ → φ, ˆσ) ≥ p(φ′ → φ, σ).

We next present a concrete classification of strong IDU transformations. We begin by noting that the three basic permutons – I (increasing), D (decreasing), and U (uniform or Lebesgue) – each define a strong IDU transformation (see Figure 4). Specifically, the transformation I yields the identity permutation on [n]

(thereby leaving every ordering CSP solution unchanged). The transformation D produces the decreasing permutation on [n] (thus reversing every solution). Finally, U outputs a permutation drawn uniformly at random from Sn (the transformed solution is uniformly random). We then introduce a new composition operation for random permutons and IDU transformations called the up-combination .2 Loosely speaking, the up-combination of two weak IDU transformations α and β with weights p and 1 − p is obtained as follows: 1. each number from 1 to n is independently assigned to group A with probability p and to group B with probability 1 − p;

> 2We note that strong IDU transformations also form a semigroup under the standard permutation composition operation, but this observation does not appear to be useful in our setting.

10 2. we apply α to order the elements in A and β to order those in B;3. finally, we place all elements of A before all elements of B.We denote the resulting transformation by pα (1 −p)β. The up-combination operation differs significantly from the standard permutation compositions ⊕ and ⊖ commonly used in the literature. 3 Its key property is that the up-combination of any number of strong IDU transformations is again a strong IDU transformation (see Claim 5.4). Thus, starting from the basic transformations I, D, and U , we can construct a wide variety of new ones. More surprisingly, every strong IDU transformation is a finite or infinite (in a suitable sense) up-combination of I, D, and U (see Theorem 7.3). From a practical standpoint, this implies that for every fixed arity k and desired precision δ > 0, every strong IDU transformation can be approximated within δ

by a finite up-combination of I, D, and U or even just I and D (see Theorems 8.1 and 8.2). A random permutation from such a combination can be sampled in time f (k, δ ) n, that is, time linear in n when k

and δ are fixed. Hence, the additional computational overhead of solving CSP(Π) relative to its relaxation 

CSP(Π ′) is linear in n (for fixed δ > 0 and finite Π). Moreover, the algorithm from Theorem 2.4 can be derandomized using the method of conditional expectations. Relying on the classification above, we study the profiles of strong IDU transformations, defined as the vectors {d(ρ, σ)}ρ∈Sk (with one coordinate for each ρ ∈ Sk). Such profiles can also be defined for arbitrary deterministic and random permutons μ. There is active research on permutation pattern densities (that is, the profiles of deterministic and random permutons), though the full landscape of possible densities remains far from understood. While every strong IDU transformation yields a valid permuton profile, the converse is not true. This naturally leads to the question of which random permuton profiles can be achieved by strong IDU transformations. 

Definition 2.6 (see [36]) . The up–down signature of a permutation ρ ∈ Sk is a sequence s of k − 1 letters 

u (for “up”) and d (for “down”), defined as follows: si = u if ρ(i) < ρ (i + 1) and si = d otherwise. We denote the up–down signature of ρ by ud-sign( ρ). We write ρ1 ∼ud ρ2 if ρ1 and ρ2 have the same signature (and hence the same length). The following theorem characterizes the profiles of strong IDU transformations and provides a criterion for when a weak IDU transformation is strong. 

Theorem 2.7. I. Consider a strong IDU transformation σ. For every k and every two permutations ρ1, ρ 2 ∈

Sk with ρ−11 ∼ud ρ−12 , we have d(ρ1, σ) = d(ρ2, σ).II. Conversely, consider a weak IDU transformation σ. Assume that for all n and k ≤ n, the pattern density d(ρ, σ n) depends only on the up–down signature of ρ−1 for ρ ∈ Sk. Then σ is a strong IDU transformation. 

This result is stated as Theorems 10.4 and 10.6 in Section 10. In particular, these theorems show that for every k, the profile of a strong IDU transformation has only 2k−1 − 1 degrees of freedom. At this point, the problem of finding an optimal strong IDU transformation can be stated purely in the language of (standard) pattern densities d(·, R ):Find a random permuton R that maximizes 

min  

> φ∈Π

p(φ′ → φ, R ) = min  

> φ∈Π

min  

> τ∈Sat( φ′)

∑

> ρ∈Sat( φ)

d(ρτ −1, R ).       

> 3One notable difference is that the operations ⊕and ⊖apply also to permutations (not just permutons or distributions over permutations) and produce a single permutation, whereas the up-combination is defined only for permutons or distributions over permutations. While one could extend it to pairs of permutations of equal length , the result would still be a distribution over permutations .

11 subject to d(ρ1, R ) = d(ρ2, R ) for all ρ1 and ρ2 with ρ−11 ∼ud ρ−12 .We also develop two complementary tools for bounding and analyzing p(φ′ → φ, σ). First, we show that profiles can be expressed using quasisymmetric polynomials (see Section 9 for details). This algebraic viewpoint provides a concise description of the feasible space of profiles and yields the following result (stated as Theorem 11.1 in Section 11). 

Theorem 2.8. There is an algorithm that, given a constraint language Π, its relaxation Π′, and a parameter 

δ > 0, finds a strong IDU transformation σ with p(Π ′ → Π, σ) ≥ p(Π ′ → Π, σ∗) − δ, where σ∗ is the optimal strong IDU transformation. We assume Π is finite and has maximum arity k. The running time of the algorithm depends only on k and δ (and not on n). 

Second, we explore analytic techniques for proving lower bounds on p(φ′ → φ, σ). To this end, we adapt Razborov’s flag algebra framework for pattern densities to the setting of strong IDU transformations. Finally, we illustrate the framework on ordering CSPs of arity 3 and 4 defined by a single predicate. We prove that the only ordering CSPs of arity 3 that admit nontrivial approximation for completely satisfiable instances, using our approach, are CSP(Betweenness) and CSP( {Betweenness , < }) (see Section 14.1). Using numerical optimization, we further show that at least 15 051 non-isomorphic ordering CSPs of arity 4, each defined by a single predicate, admit nontrivial approximation for completely satisfiable instances (this number includes only NP-hard ordering CSPs). Moreover, at least 843 ordering CSPs defined by a single predicate admit nontrivial approximation in the nearly satisfiable regime (this number excludes bounded-arity precedence CSPs). 

# 3 Applying the framework to satisfiable and nearly satisfiable ordering CSPs 

3.1 Results for single-predicate ordering CSPs of arity 3 and 4 

We first briefly describe our results for single-predicate ordering CSPs of arity 3 and 4. Let us say that two predicates are isomorphic if one can be obtained from the other by renaming the variables or by taking the dual (i.e., replacing < with > in all formulas). For example, the following predicates are isomorphic: φ1(x1, x 2, x 3) = ( x1 < x 2) ∧ (x1 < x 3), φ2(x1, x 2, x 3) = ( x2 < x 1) ∧ (x2 <x3), and φ3(x1, x 2, x 3) = ( x3 > x 1) ∧ (x3 > x 2). We call each of the L-, R-, and ε-relaxations of a predicate φ nontrivial if it is neither equal to φ nor to the constant-true predicate. Our results are shown in Figure 2. The main takeaway is that the arity 3 landscape is essentially ex-hausted, whereas arity 4 already contains many positive examples in both regimes. Excluding the two constant predicates, there are 11 non-isomorphic predicates of arity 3. Among them, 

4 are polynomial-time tractable, and 3 of these are precedence predicates (see Definition 1.2). Consequently, these 3 predicates admit a 1 − O(ε log n log log n) approximation in the nearly satisfiable regime. Of the remaining 7 predicates, only 3 have a nontrivial L- or R-relaxation. Among these 3, only one – Betweenness – admits a nontrivial approximation guarantee using our framework. Excluding the 3 precedence predicates, none of the remaining 8 predicates has a nontrivial ε-relaxation. Excluding the two constant predicates, there are 355 046 non-isomorphic predicates of arity 4. Among them, 29 are polynomial-time tractable, and 11 of these are precedence predicates. Consequently, these 

11 predicates admit a 1 − O(ε log n log log n) approximation in the nearly satisfiable regime. Among the remaining 355 017 predicates, 39 299 have a nontrivial L- or R-relaxation. At least 15 051 of them admit a nontrivial approximation guarantee in the satisfiable regime. Also, 993 predicates have a nontrivial ε-relaxation. Among them, at least 843 admit a nontrivial approximation guarantee in the nearly satisfiable regime. (Note that all of these 843 predicates also admit a nontrivial approximation in the satisfiable regime.) 12 Dataset and verification code A database of predicates with their approximation factors, together with descriptions of all relaxations, up-down signatures, and IDU combinations used in the paper, as well as code for verifying the correctness of these results, will be made publicly available at [35]. 

3.2 Completely satisfiable instances 

We briefly review the classification of polynomially tractable temporal CSPs due to Bodirsky and Kára [8]. The key difference between ordering and temporal CSPs is that, in temporal CSPs, distinct variables may take the same value; accordingly, each predicate is a Boolean formula involving clauses of the form xi < x j

and xi = xj . In contrast, in an ordering CSP all variables are required to take distinct values. Bodirsky and Kára showed that a temporal CSP is polynomial-time tractable if and only if its temporal constraint language is preserved by at least one of the following operations: ll , min , mi , mx , their duals, or a constant operation [8, Theorem 50]; otherwise, the CSP is NP-hard. To apply this result to ordering CSPs, we reinterpret every ordering CSP as a temporal CSP. First, we allow different variables to take the same value. Second, we extend each predicate by declaring that 

φ(x1, . . . , x k) is unsatisfied whenever xi = xj for some i̸ = j. In this way, [8] yields a criterion for the polynomial-time tractability of ordering CSPs, which we now make more explicit. We define two classes of ordering CSPs, which we call Not-First Ordering CSPs and Not-Last Ordering CSPs. In the context of temporal CSPs and scheduling, these classes have been studied under the name AND/OR precedence constraints. 

Definition 3.1 (Not-First and Not-Last Ordering CSPs) . Define the predicate NFirst k(x1, . . . , x k) as x1 >

min( x2, . . . , x k), or equivalently (x1 > x 2) ∨ · · · ∨ (x1 > x k). It is satisfied if and only if x1 is not the first among x1, . . . , x k. Similarly, define the predicate NLast k(x1, . . . , x k) as x1 < max( x2, . . . , x k), or equivalently (x1 < x 2) ∨ · · · ∨ (x1 < x k).We denote the set of predicates φ that are conjunctions of NFirst predicates (possibly on different subsets of variables and of different arities) by ΠNFirst :

φ =

> m∧
> i=1

NFirst ki (xji1 , . . . , x jik i ).

Similarly, we denote by ΠNLast the set of predicates that are conjunctions of NLast predicates. We say that an ordering CSP CSP(Π) is a Not-First Ordering CSP if Π ⊆ ΠNFirst . Similarly, we say that CSP(Π) is a Not-Last Ordering CSP if Π ⊆ ΠNLast . When the arity of NFirst and NLast is clear from context, we omit the subscript k.Not-First and Not-Last ordering CSPs are known to be polynomially tractable. It follows from the Bodirsky– Kára classification that CSP(Π) is polynomially tractable if and only if it is either a Not-First or a Not-Last ordering CSP. Namely, the classification of ll -closed temporal CSPs from [9] immediately implies that every 

ll -closed ordering CSP is a Not-First ordering CSP, and every dual-ll -closed ordering CSP is a Not-Last ordering CSP. All temporal CSPs preserved by min , mi , and mx are shuffle-closed. We show in Appendix A that every shuffle-closed ordering CSP is a Not-First ordering CSP. Similarly, all ordering CSPs preserved by dual-min , dual-mi , and dual-mx are Not-Last ordering CSPs. No ordering predicate of arity k ≥ 2 is preserved by constant operations. For every ordering predicate φ, we define two canonical tractable relaxations, the L-relaxation φL and the R-relaxation φR, as follows. φL is a relaxation of φ in ΠNFirst with the minimal (by inclusion) set of satisfying assignments Sat( φL). In other words, it is the conjunction of all predicates NFirst t(xi1 , . . . , x it )

13 Arity 3 

All non-isomorphic arity-3 predicates (excluding constants) 

11 

Poly-tractable 

4

With a nontrivial L- or R-relaxation 

3

With a nontrivial ε-relaxation 

0

Precedence predicates 

3

admit 1 − O(ε log n log log n) approximation in nearly satisfiable regime 

Nontrivial approximation in satisfiable regime 

only Betweenness 1 

All non-isomorphic arity-4 predicates (excluding constants) 

355 046 

Poly-tractable 

29 

With a nontrivial L- or R-relaxation 

39 299 

With a nontrivial ε-relaxation 

993 

Precedence predicates 

11 

admit 1 − O(ε log n log log n) approximation in nearly satisfiable regime 

Nontrivial approximation in satisfiable regime 

at least 15 051 

Nontrivial approximation in nearly satisfiable regime 

at least 843 

# Arity 4 

Figure 2: Summary of the classification results for single-predicate ordering CSPs of arity 3 and 4. The diagram shows the number of predicates of different types. The boxes labeled “With a nontrivial L- or 

R-relaxation” count predicates for which at least one of the canonical tractable relaxations φL and φR is nontrivial. The boxes labeled “With a nontrivial ε-relaxation” are defined analogously. 14 that are implied by φ(x1, . . . , x k) (where i1, . . . , i t ∈ [k]). Similarly, φR is a minimal relaxation of φ in 

ΠNLast : it is the conjunction of all predicates NLast t(xi1 , . . . , x it ) that are implied by φ(x1, . . . , x k).By applying Theorem 2.4 to Π′ = Π L and Π′ = Π R, we obtain the following result. 

Theorem 3.2. Consider an ordering CSP CSP(Π) . Let {σn} be a weak IDU transformation that can be sampled in polynomial time. There is a polynomial-time algorithm that, given a satisfiable instance of 

CSP(Π) , finds a solution satisfying at least a 

max( p(Π L → Π, σ), p (Π R → Π, σ)) 

fraction of constraints in expectation. 

Further, by Theorems 6.7 and 11.1, for every arity k and δ > 0, we can find a nearly optimal strong IDU transformation R such that 

p(Π ′ → Π, R ) ≥ p(Π ′ → Π, σ) − δ. 

This requires time depending only on k and δ (and not on n). Furthermore, in this case, we can sample from this IDU transformation in time f (k, 1/δ ) n. Additionally, the algorithm from Theorem 3.2 can be derandomized using the method of conditional expectations. Using Theorem 11.1 together with numerical optimization (via standard optimization libraries), we ob-tain the following result. All computations are verified via exact arithmetic over the rational numbers. 

Theorem 3.3. There are at least 15 051 non-isomorphic ordering CSPs of arity 4, each defined by a single NP-hard predicate, that admit nontrivial approximation for completely satisfiable instances. In other words, these predicates are not approximation resistant in the completely satisfiable regime. 

3.3 Nearly satisfiable instances 

Next, we apply our approach to nearly satisfiable instances of ordering CSPs. Suppose we are given a (1 −ε)-satisfiable instance, where ε = O(1 / polylog( n)) . Previously, the only known algorithm in this regime was an approximation algorithm for the Minimum Feedback Arc Set problem: when applied to CSP( <), it finds a solution satisfying at least a 1 − O(ε log n log log n) fraction of constraints [20, 43]. The same guarantee extends to bounded-arity precedence CSPs (see Definition 1.2). No other guarantees were known for nearly satisfiable ordering CSPs. We use our framework to obtain approximation results for nearly satisfiable instances of other ordering CSPs. Specifically, we replace each predicate φ with the conjunction of all clauses of the form xi < x j

implied by φ. This yields the ε-relaxation φε of φ, in which every constraint is a conjunction of such clauses. We then apply the approximation algorithm for Minimum Feedback Arc Set to the relaxed instance, and use an appropriate IDU transformation to obtain a solution for the original instance. By applying Theorem 2.4 to this setting, we obtain the following result. 

Theorem 3.4. Consider an ordering CSP CSP(Π) . Let {σn} be a weak IDU transformation that can be sampled in polynomial time. There is a polynomial-time algorithm that, given a (1 − ε)-satisfiable instance of CSP(Π) , finds a solution satisfying at least a 

p(Π ε → Π, σ) − O(ε log n log log n)

fraction of constraints in expectation. 

Using numerical optimization together with verification via exact arithmetic over Q, we obtain the fol-lowing theorem. 15 Figure 3: The left panel shows five points sampled from a permuton (whose measure is supported on two segments), defining the pattern (1 3 4 2 5 ). The right panel displays the permuton μπ associated with the permutation π = ( 3 2 5 1 4 ) ∈ S5, whose support consists of five disjoint squares with side length 1/5.

Theorem 3.5. There are at least 843 non-isomorphic ordering CSPs of arity 4, each defined by a sin-gle predicate, that admit nontrivial approximation in the nearly satisfiable regime; this number excludes bounded-arity precedence CSPs. Given a (1 − ε)-satisfiable instance, the algorithm returns a solution satis-fying at least an (α − O(ε log n log log n)) fraction of constraints, where α > α random is the approximation factor achieved by the algorithm. 

# 4 Preliminaries 

4.1 Permutons 

In this section, we review the definitions and basic properties of deterministic and random permutons. Per-mutons are limit objects for permutations analogous to graphons for graphs. Deterministic permutons were introduced by Hoppen, Kohayakawa, Moreira, Ráth, and Sampaio [25]. Random permutons were later defined by Bassino, Bouvel, Féray, Gerin, Maazoun, and Pierrot [5]. 

Definition 4.1. A (deterministic) permuton μ is a Borel probability measure on the unit square [0 , 1] 2 with uniform marginals. That is, μ(A × [0 , 1]) = μ([0 , 1] × A) = λ(A) for every Borel set A ⊆ [0 , 1] , where λ

is the Lebesgue measure on [0 , 1] .A random permuton R is a probability distribution over the space of permutons. The space of permutons is equipped with the weak topology: a sequence of permutons μi converges to μ if for every bounded continuous function f : [0 , 1] 2 → R, we have ∫ 

> [0 ,1] 2

f dμ i → ∫ 

> [0 ,1] 2

f dμ . This topology is induced by the box distance, defined as 

d□(μ1, μ 2) = sup 

> [a1,a 2],[b1,b 2]⊆[0 ,1]

|μ1([ a1, a 2] × [b1, b 2]) − μ2([ a1, a 2] × [b1, b 2]) | .

The space of random permutons is also equipped with the weak topology: a sequence of random permutons 

Rn converges to R if for every bounded continuous function F on the space of permutons, Eμ∼Rn [F (μ)] →

Eμ∼R[F (μ)] .Permutons generalize permutations: every permutation π ∈ Sn has an associated permuton μπ. The permuton μπ is supported on n disjoint squares of size 1/n ×1/n , where square number i is [( i−1) /n, i/n ]×

[( π(i) − 1) /n, π (i)/n ]. The measure μπ is uniform on its support; that is, its probability density equals n

on the support and 0 elsewhere. Similarly, for a distribution Dn of permutations of length n, we can define a corresponding random permuton Rn in which each μσ occurs with the same probability as σ in Dn.Given a deterministic permuton μ and a parameter n, we can sample a permutation (or pattern) σn

of length n as follows. Choose n random points (X1, Y 1), . . . , (Xn, Y n) independently according to the 16 measure μ. Then σn is the pattern defined by the points {(Xi, Y i)}ni=1 (see Definition 2.2). Thus, every deterministic permuton μ defines a weak IDU transformation (the converse does not generally hold). We now extend the definition of pattern densities to permutons. Consider ρ ∈ Sn. The pattern density 

d(ρ, μ ) equals the probability that the pattern σn (sampled as above from μ) equals ρ. Further, given a subset 

J ⊂ [0 , 1] of size n, we define the restricted pattern density dJ (ρ, μ ) as follows. • Let X1, . . . , X n be the elements of J in increasing order. • Sample each Yi independently according to μ conditioned on Xi.• Let σn be the pattern of {(Xi, Y i)}ni=1 .Then dJ (ρ, μ ) is the probability that σn = ρ. Importantly, 

d(ρ, μ ) = EJ [dJ (ρ, μ )] ,

where the expectation is taken over a random subset J ⊆ [0 , 1] obtained by sampling n independent points from the uniform distribution on [0 , 1] .We state important properties of deterministic permutons established in [25] in the following theorem. 

Theorem 4.2 (see [25]) .

• The set of all permutons is a compact set with respect to the weak topology. 

• The function μ 7 → d(ρ, μ ) is continuous with respect to the weak topology on permutons. 

We now generalize the definitions above to random permutons. To sample a permutation σn from a random permuton R, we first sample a deterministic permuton P according to R, and then sample σn from 

P as described above. We define d(ρ, R ) = EP ∼R[d(ρ, P )] and dJ (ρ, R ) = EP ∼R[dJ (ρ, P )] . As in the deterministic case, every random permuton R defines a weak IDU transformation. Following [5], we define consistent sequences of random permutations, or in our terminology, consistent weak IDU transformations. 

Definition 4.3. We say that a weak IDU transformation σ is consistent if for every k ≥ 1 and n ≥ k, the distribution of σk coincides with that of patt( σn, J ), where J is a random subset of [n] of size k (here the randomness is over both J and σn). 

Theorem 4.4 (see Proposition 2.9 in [5]) . Every random permuton defines a consistent weak IDU transfor-mation. Conversely, every consistent weak IDU transformation is defined by a random permuton. 

For brevity, we will refer to random permutons that define strong IDU transformations as strong IDU permutons .

4.2 Pattern density sums 

Our ultimate goal is to analyze p(φ′ → φ, σ) for various IDU transformations σ. By definition, this quantity is an infimum over n, J, and τ ∈ Sat( φ′) of the following sum:  

> ∑
> ρ∈Sat( φ)τ−1

dJ (ρ, σ n).

We will refer to sums of this form as (restricted) pattern density sums . Formally, let ρ1, . . . , ρ t ∈ Sk and 

c1, . . . , c t ∈ R; we consider density sums of the form 

> t∑
> i=1

cidJ (ρi, σ n) and 

> t∑
> i=1

cidJ (ρi, R ),

17 where σ is a weak IDU transformation and R is a random or deterministic permuton. We will also consider pattern density sums without fixing a subset J

> t∑
> i=1

cid(ρi, σ n) and 

> t∑
> i=1

cid(ρi, R ).

Our focus will be on the set of pattern density inequalities that a weak IDU transformation or a random permuton satisfies. We say that a weak IDU transformation σ satisfies a pattern density inequality 

> t∑
> i=1

cidJ (ρi, σ n) ≥ b, 

if, for every n ≥ k and every J ⊆ [n] of size k, the inequality holds. Similarly, we say that a random permuton R satisfies a pattern density inequality if the inequality 

> t∑
> i=1

cidJ (ρi, R ) ≥ b

holds almost surely over the choice of a random subset J ⊆ [0 , 1] of size k (obtained by sampling k

independent points from the uniform distribution on [0 , 1] ). It will be convenient for us to work with homogeneous inequalities where b = 0 . Given an inequality with b̸ = 0 , we can always rewrite it as 

> t∑
> i=1

cidJ (ρi, σ n) ≥ b ∑ 

> τ∈Sk

dJ (τ, σ n),

since ∑  

> τ∈Sk

dJ (τ, σ n) is always 1 for n ≥ k. The same trick applies to permutons as well. More generally, for ρ ∈ Sk and n ≥ k, it always holds that 

d(ρ, R ) = ∑ 

> τ∈Sn

d(ρ, τ ) d(τ, R ),

which is a representation of d(ρ, R ) as a sum of densities d(τ, R ) with fixed nonnegative coefficients d(ρ, τ ).We will use this formula in Section 13, where we will present the flag algebra framework. From the previous discussion, we make the following important observation. 

Observation 4.5. If a random permuton R satisfies all pattern density inequalities that are satisfied by a weak IDU transformation σ, then for every ordering predicate φ and every relaxation φ′ of φ, we have 

p(φ′ → φ, R ) ≥ p(φ′ → φ, σ).

Put simply, this means that R is at least as good for our purposes as σ. We will also use a shorthand notation: 

dJ 

> (t∑
> i=1

ciρi, σ n

> )
> def

=

> t∑
> i=1

cidJ (ρi, σ n),d 

> (t∑
> i=1

ciρi, R 

> )
> def

=

> t∑
> i=1

cid(ρi, R ),

which will become especially useful in Section 13, where we interpret the maps d(·, R ) as algebra homo-morphisms. 18 0

1

1 0

1

1 0

1

1

Figure 4: The increasing I, decreasing D, and uniform U permutons. 

4.3 Notation 

We denote the set of positive integers by N. Let [k] = {1, . . . , k }. We denote the set of all permutations on 

[k] by Sk. We denote the length of a permutation ρ by |ρ|. We say that xi has rank r among x1, . . . , x n if it occupies position r in the sorted order of x1, . . . , x n.For a vector v ∈ Zr with nonnegative entries, let 

M (v) =  

> (

∥v∥1

v1, . . . , v r

> )

= ∥v∥1!

v1!v2! · · · vr! .

# 5 IDU transformations 

5.1 I, D, and U permutons and their up-combinations 

As discussed in the preliminaries, permutations of any length can be sampled from both deterministic and random permutons. Deterministic and random permutons thus define weak IDU transformations. The con-verse is generally not true: not every weak IDU transformation is defined by a permuton. However, every strong IDU transformation can be represented by a random permuton, as we will see in Section 5.2. We begin with several examples of strong IDU transformations, followed by the definition of a compo-sition operation showing that the composition of strong IDU transformations is again strong. This yields a rich family of strong IDU transformations obtained by composing the basic I, D, and U transformations. To that end, we first introduce three fundamental permutons – I (increasing), D (decreasing), and U

(uniform or Lebesgue) – illustrated in Figure 4. The permuton I is the uniform measure on the main diagonal of [0 , 1] 2; D is the uniform measure on the anti-diagonal; and U is the uniform (Lebesgue) measure on the entire square [0 , 1] 2.The increasing IDU transformation associated with I corresponds to the sequence of identity permu-tations, σn = id n, while the decreasing IDU transformation corresponds to the sequence of decreasing permutations defined by σn(i) = decr n(i) = n + 1 − i. The uniform IDU transformation associated with 

U corresponds to the sequence of permutations σn sampled uniformly at random from Sn.Observe that I, D, and U are all strong IDU transformations: for every ρ ∈ Sk and every J, dJ (ρ, I )

equals 1 if ρ = id k and 0 otherwise. Similarly, dJ (ρ, D ) equals 1 if ρ = decr k and 0 otherwise. Finally, 

dJ (ρ, U ) equals 1/k ! for every ρ ∈ Sk. All these formulas are independent of the choice of J.

Remark 5.1. Let us also present an example of an interesting weak IDU transformation that is not a strong 

IDU transformation. Consider a Gaussian random walk {Xi} with X0 = 0 , Xi+1 − Xi ∼ N (0 , 1) ,and independent increments. For every n, define a random permutation σn as the pattern of the sequence 

X1, . . . , X n. Then σ satisfies nontrivial pattern density sum equalities: dJ (( 1 2 ), σ n) = dJ (( 2 1 ), σ n) = 1/2

19 0

1

1

> 12

0

1

1

> 15
> 35

Figure 5: The figure shows up-combinations of permutons: 12 I 12 D (left) and 15 D 25 U 25 I (right). and dJ (( 1 2 3 ), σ n) = dJ (( 3 2 1 ), σ n) = dJ (( 1 3 2 ), σ n)+ dJ (( 2 3 1 ), σ n) = dJ (( 2 1 3 ), σ n)+ dJ (( 3 1 2 ), σ n) = 

> 1

/4. Nevertheless, one can easily see that the value of dJ (( 1 3 2 ), σ n) depends on J; e.g., d{1,2,n }(( 1 3 2 ), σ n) →

0 as n → ∞ , whereas d{1,n −1,n }(( 1 3 2 ), σ n) → 1/4 as n → ∞ (here we write permutations using the one-line convention). As we show in this paper (see Theorem 6.7), there exists a strong IDU transformation satisfying the same pattern density sum equalities. In particular, the permutons 12 I 12 D and 12 D 12 I satisfy the same pattern density sum equalities (see Definition 5.2 and Figure 5). 

Definition 5.2 (up-combination of IDU transformations) . Consider weak IDU transformations A1, . . . , A r

and nonnegative coefficients p1, . . . , p r that sum to 1. We define their composition 

C = p1A1 p2A2 . . . prAr

as follows. Given n, we independently assign each element i ∈ [n] to one of r groups G1, . . . , G r with 

Pr( i ∈ Gj ) = pj . For each group Gj , sample a random permutation σ(j) from transformation Aj with length parameter |Gj |.Define an ordering on [n]: if a ∈ Gj and b ∈ Gj′ with j < j ′, then a precedes b in the ordering. If 

a, b ∈ Gj , their relative order is determined by σ(j).

C outputs the random permutation of length n that is order-isomorphic to the resulting ordering of [n].We refer to this operation as the up-combination of IDU transformations. 

Definition 5.3 (up-combination of permutons) . Consider deterministic permutons A1, . . . , A r and nonneg-ative coefficients p1, . . . , p r that sum to 1. We define the up-combination C = p1A1 p2A2 . . . prAr as follows. Split the unit square [0 , 1] 2 into rectangles R1, . . . , R r of width 1 and heights p1, p 2, . . . , p r from bottom to top. Let sj = ∑j−1 

> i=1

pi. Define the measure on each rectangle Rj = [0 , 1] × [sj , s j+1 ] to be Aj

scaled vertically by a factor of pj ; formally, 

μRj (S) = pj · Aj

> (

{(x, (y − sj )/p j ) : ( x, y ) ∈ S}).

It is easy to see that the definitions of up-combinations of IDU transformations and permutons are consistent with each other. 

Claim 5.4. If A1, . . . , A r are strong IDU transformations, then their up-combination C = p1A1 p2A2

. . . prAr is also a strong IDU transformation. Proof. Fix k ≥ 1. In the up-combination C, each element of [n] is independently assigned to group Gj with probability pj , and the elements within each group are ordered according to the permutation sampled from 

Aj .20 Consider a set of indices Q = {i1, . . . , i k} ⊆ [n] with i1 < i 2 < · · · < i k, and suppose these elements get assigned to groups Gj1 , G j2 , . . . , G jk , respectively. We analyze the distribution of the pattern 

patt( σn, Q ).Because the indices j1, . . . , j k are sampled independently from the same distribution, their joint distri-bution depends only on the probabilities p1, . . . , p r and not on the specific choice of index set Q. Moreover, the relative order of elements in Gj ∩ Q is given by the induced pattern patt( σ(j), G j ∩ Q), whose distribu-tion depends only on |Gj ∩ Q| and not on the specific elements that form Gj ∩ Q, since Aj is a strong IDU transformation. The relative order between groups is deterministic: all elements of group j precede those of group j′

when j < j ′. So the overall distribution of the induced pattern ρ ∈ Sk is the same for every subset Q. Hence 

dQ(ρ, C ) is independent of Q, and C is a strong IDU transformation. 

Definition 5.5. An IDU combination is an up-combination of the I, D, and U permutons. An ID combina-tion is an up-combination of the I and D permutons. 

Corollary 5.6. Every ID and IDU combination is a strong IDU permuton. 

5.2 Consistency of strong IDU transformations 

Claim 5.7. Every strong IDU transformation σ is consistent. Therefore, it is defined by a random permuton. Proof. Consistency of σ means that for every a < b , the random permutation σa has the same distribution as patt( σb, J ), where σb is a random permutation and J is a subset of [b] of size a sampled uniformly at random and independently of σb.By the definition of a strong IDU transformation, the distribution of patt( σc, J ) is the same for all c ≥ a

and all a-element subsets J ⊆ [c]. In particular, for c = b, we have that patt( σb, J ) is distributed identically to patt( σa, [a]) = σa. Hence, σ is consistent. Finally, by Theorem 4.4 (see Section 4), every consistent weak IDU transformation is defined by a random permuton. Therefore, σ is defined by a random permuton. 

# 6 From weak to strong IDU transformations 

In this section, we show that for every weak IDU transformation σ, there exists a strong IDU transformation defined by a random permuton S such that S satisfies all the linear constraints on pattern densities that σ

satisfies (see Section 4.2 for relevant definitions). Our proof consists of two main steps. • First, using that the space of permutons is compact, we observe that there exists a random permuton 

W that satisfies all the linear constraints on pattern densities that σ satisfies. • Then we begin changing W : we let W0 = W , and go over all permutations ρ1, ρ 2, . . . (enumerated arbitrarily). At iteration i, we modify Wi−1 to obtain Wi such that for every j ≤ i, dJ (ρj , W i) does not depend on the choice of J with |J| = |ρj | (almost surely). Finally, we define S as a limit point of the sequence W1, W 2, . . . .

6.1 From a weak IDU transformation σ to a random permuton W

Before we proceed with the first step, we need the following definition and lemma. 21 Definition 6.1. For a permutation τ ∈ Sk, let Fτ (x1, . . . , x k, y 1, . . . , y k) be the indicator function that the points (x1, y 1), . . . , (xk, y k) form the pattern τ (if xi = xj or yi = yj for some i̸ = j, then Fτ is 0). For a deterministic permuton P and measurable subsets A1, . . . , A k ⊆ [0 , 1] , define 

GP,τ (A1, . . . , A k) = E

> [

Fτ (x1, . . . , x k, y 1, . . . , y k)

> k∏
> i=1

1Ai (xi)

> ]

,

where the expectation is taken over independent samples (xi, y i) ∼ P ; 1Ai is the indicator function of Ai.For a random permuton R, define 

ˆGR,τ (A1, . . . , A k) = EP ∼R [GP,τ (A1, . . . , A k)] .

The expectation is taken over the random choice of a deterministic permuton P from distribution R.

Lemma 6.2. For any fixed pattern τ and segments Q1, . . . , Q k ⊆ [0 , 1] , the quantity GP,τ (Q1, . . . , Q k) is continuous as a function of a deterministic permuton P . Also, for a random permuton R, ˆGR,τ (Q1, . . . , Q k)

is continuous as a function of R.Proof. First, assume that P is deterministic. The function F (x1, . . . , x k, y 1, . . . , y k), which checks whether the points (x1, y 1), . . . , (xk, y k) form the pattern τ , is discontinuous only if some pair of points (xi, y i) and 

(xj , y j ) with i̸ = j share the same x- or y-coordinate. The set of such points has measure zero with respect to the product measure P ⊗k, since the marginals of P are uniform on [0 , 1] and hence each xi, x j (as well as 

yi, y j ) are independently and uniformly distributed when sampled from P . Similarly, the indicator functions 

1Qi (xi) are discontinuous only on the boundaries of the intervals Qi, which have measure zero with respect to the uniform distribution on [0 , 1] . Furthermore, GP,τ (Q1, . . . , Q k) ∈ [0 , 1] is bounded. By the Portmanteau theorem, GP,τ (Q1, . . . , Q k) is therefore continuous as a function of the determin-istic permuton P in the weak topology. Now consider a random permuton R. Since GP,τ (Q1, . . . , Q k) is a bounded continuous functional of P ,its expectation ˆGR,τ (Q1, . . . , Q k) is continuous as a function of R, again by the Portmanteau theorem. 

Claim 6.3. Consider a weak IDU transformation σ. There exists a random permuton W that satisfies every linear pattern-density constraint that σ satisfies. Proof. Consider the sequence of random permutations σ1, σ 2, σ 4, . . . , σ 2t , . . . . For each t, let St be the ran-dom permuton associated with the random permutation σ2t (see Section 4.1 for the definition of the random permuton corresponding to a random permutation). By compactness of the space of random permutons, there exists a limit point W of the sequence S1, S 2, S 3, . . . , S t, . . . .Fix k and a linear constraint on the sum of densities. As discussed in Section 4.2, we can write it in a homogeneous form as m∑

> i=1

ci dJ (τi, σ n) ≥ 0,

where all τi ∈ Sk. Define 

HR(A1, . . . , A k) = 

> m∑
> i=1

ci ˆGR,τ i (A1, . . . , A k).

Now define special sets Q1, . . . , Q k. Fix δ = 1 /2r for some r, and consider disjoint intervals Qi =(( qi − 1) δ, q iδ) for some choice of distinct qi ∈ [2 r]. By Lemma 6.2, for fixed segments Q1, . . . , Q k and pattern τ , function ˆGR,τ (Q1, . . . , Q k) is continuous as a function of R, and hence HR(Q1, . . . , Q k) is also continuous as a linear combination of continuous functions. 22 Next, we show that for every choice of intervals Q1, . . . , Q k, we have HSt (Q1, . . . , Q k) ≥ 0 whenever 

t ≥ r. Indeed, 

ˆGSt,τ (Q1, . . . , Q k) = 12(t−r)k

> ∑
> J

dJ (τ, σ 2t ),

where the sum is over all subsets J = {j1, . . . , j k} with ji ∈ { (qi − 1)2 t−r + 1 , . . . , q i2t−r}. Since  

> ∑mi=1

ci dJ (τi, σ 2t ) ≥ 0 for every J, it follows that HSt (Q1, . . . , Q k) ≥ 0.Letting t → ∞ and using the continuity of HR(Q1, . . . , Q k) as a function of R, we conclude that 

HW (Q1, . . . , Q k) ≥ 0 for every choice of intervals Q1, . . . , Q k as above. Now, HW defines an absolutely continuous signed measure on C = [0 , 1] k, where the measure of a rectangle A1 × · · · × Ak is given by 

HW (A1, . . . , A k). Let C′ ⊆ C be the set of all points with distinct coordinates. Since the Lebesgue σ-algebra on C′ is generated by sets of the form Q1 × · · · × Qk with intervals Qi as above, it follows that HW

is nonnegative on C′. Therefore, HW is nonnegative on all of C, since C \ C′ has measure zero with respect to the Lebesgue measure, and hence also with respect to the absolutely continuous signed measure HW .By the Lebesgue differentiation theorem, the Radon–Nikodym derivative of HW with respect to the Lebesgue measure is nonnegative almost surely. The derivative at point (x1, . . . , x k) equals the expectation of m∑

> i=1

ci dJ (τi, W ) where J = {x1, . . . , x k}.

We conclude that ∑mi=1 ci dJ (τi, W ) ≥ 0 almost surely, and therefore W satisfies all linear constraints on pattern densities that σ satisfies. Recalling Observation 4.5, we conclude that for every IDU transformation σ, there exists a random permuton W that is at least as good as σ for our intended applications. 

6.2 From W to a strong IDU transformation 

Now we show that there exists a strong IDU permuton S (a random permuton which defines a strong IDU transformation) that satisfies all the linear constraints on pattern densities that W does. Let ρ1, ρ 2, ρ 3, . . . 

be an enumeration of all permutations (patterns). Let W0 = W . We prove that there exists a sequence of random permutons W0, W 1, W 2, . . . such that Wi satisfies all the linear constraints that W satisfies, and 

dJ (ρj , W i) = d(ρj , W i) for every j ≤ i and all J with |J| = |ρj |. Assume that we have already constructed 

Wi−1. We now construct Wi.

Lemma 6.4. Let R be a random permuton, ρ ∈ Sk, and ε > 0. There exists a random permuton R∗ 

> ε

that satisfies all the linear constraints on pattern densities that R satisfies, and further, 

dJ (ρ, R ∗ 

> ε

) ∈ [d(ρ, R ∗ 

> ε

) − ε, d (ρ, R ∗ 

> ε

) + ε]

almost surely (the randomness is over the choice of a k-subset J). Proof. Consider an infinite sequence of disjoint intervals in (0 , 1) , ordered from left to right, defined by 

Qt = (1 − 21−t, 1 − 2−t), t = 1 , 2, . . . . 

In particular, Q1 = (0 , 1/2) , Q2 = (1 /2, 3/4) , Q3 = (3 /4, 7/8) , and so on. The specific choice of these intervals is not essential; any family of nonempty disjoint intervals ordered from left to right would suffice. They are chosen here purely for concreteness. For every k-subset H of positive integers N, define a number cH as follows. Let H = {i1, . . . , i k}

with i1 < · · · < i k. We sample xi1 , . . . , x ik independently; each xi is chosen uniformly at random from 23 Qi. Then cH is the expectation of d{xi1 ,...,x ik }(ρ, R ) over the random choice of xi1 , . . . , x ik (sampled as described above). Assign H the color ⌊cH /ε ⌋. Note that we use at most 1/ε + 1 colors; if two sets H1 and 

H2 have the same color, then |cH1 − cH2 | ≤ ε.Now we use the Ramsey theorem for infinite hypergraphs (see [40]). 

Theorem 6.5 (Ramsey theorem for infinite hypergraphs) . Consider the complete k-uniform hypergraph on the set of positive integers N. Suppose that each hyperedge is colored with one of M colors. Then there exists an infinite subset of vertices U such that all hyperedges within U have the same color. 

By the Ramsey theorem, there exists an infinite subset of positive integers U such that all k-subsets of 

U have the same color. Let u1, u 2, . . . , u i, . . . be the elements of U in the increasing order. We construct a new weak IDU transformation σ. Given n, we sample a permutation σn as follows. First, we sample a deterministic permuton P from R. Then, for every i ∈ [n], we independently sample xi from Qui and yi

according to the conditional distribution of y given x in P . We let σn ∈ Sn be the pattern of the sequence 

(x1, y 1), . . . , (xn, y n).Note that dJ (τ, σ n) equals Ex1,...,x n [d{xj1 ,...,x jt }(τ, R )] for every t, τ ∈ St, and J = {j1, . . . , j t} ⊆ [n].Thus, the transformation σ satisfies all linear constraints on pattern densities that R satisfies. By our choice of U , all k-subsets of U have the same color. Therefore, 

dJ (ρ, σ n) ∈ [aε, (a + 1) ε)

for some fixed a. By Claim 6.3, there exists a random permuton R∗ 

> ε

that satisfies all linear constraints on pattern densities satisfied by σ. In particular, it satisfies all linear constraints satisfied by R and, additionally, the two constraints dJ (ρ, σ n) ≥ aε and dJ (ρ, σ n) ≤ (a + 1) ε that hold for σ. We obtained the desired random permuton R∗ 

> ε

.

Corollary 6.6. Let R be a random permuton, ρ ∈ Sk. There exists a random permuton R∗ that satisfies all the linear constraints on pattern densities that R satisfies, and further, 

dJ (ρ, R ∗) = d(ρ, R ∗)

almost surely over the choice of J.Proof. Consider the sequence of random permutons R∗

> 1/n

. Since the space of random permutons is compact, the sequence has a limit point. Let R∗ be a limit point. Almost surely we have 

|dJ (ρ, R ∗) − d(ρ, R ∗)| ≤ lim sup 

> n→∞

|dJ (ρ, R ∗

> 1/n

) − d(ρ, R ∗

> 1/n

)| ≤ lim  

> n→∞

1/n = 0 

Theorem 6.7. For every weak IDU transformation σ, there exists a strong IDU permuton S that satisfies all the linear constraints on pattern densities that σ satisfies. Proof. As outlined above, we start with W0 = W from Claim 6.3 and iteratively construct W1, W 2, . . . .Each time we use Corollary 6.6 to construct Wi from Wi−1, ensuring that dJ (ρi, W i) = d(ρi, W i) for every 

J. Corollary 6.6 guarantees that Wi satisfies all the linear constraints on pattern densities that Wi−1 and hence W satisfies. Finally, we define S as a limit point of the sequence W1, W 2, . . . . By construction, S satisfies all the linear constraints on pattern densities that W (and hence σ) satisfies. Further, if some Wj satisfies a linear constraint, then so do all Wi with i ≥ j and by continuity S. In particular, for every j, we have dJ (ρj , W j ) = 

d(ρj , W j ). That is, Wj satisfies a linear constraint dJ (ρj , W j ) = c with c = d(ρj , W j ). We get that S also 24 H1

H2

Figure 6: The figure illustrates the procedure for obtaining Yi from Y ′′  

> i

. Blue dots represent points (Xi, Y ′′  

> i

),and red dots represent points (Xi, Y i). Black dots in the gray region represent points (Xi, Y i) = ( Xi, Y ′′  

> i

)

that lie outside all segments in H.satisfies this constraint: dJ (ρj , S ) = c (again, c = d(ρj , W j )). It follows that d(ρj , S ) = EJ [dJ (ρj , S )] = c

and thus 

dJ (ρj , S ) = d(ρj , S ).

Since this holds for all permutations ρj and all J, we conclude that S defines a strong IDU transformation. 

# 7 Classification of strong IDU transformations 

7.1 Core IDU permutons 

We now provide a classification of strong IDU transformations. We first define core deterministic IDU permutons, which generalize IDU combinations that we considered earlier. Informally, one can think of them as infinite IDU combinations. 

Definition 7.1. Consider a finite or infinite family H of disjoint intervals Hi on [0 , 1] . For each interval Hi

fix a label, either I or D. We define a core deterministic IDU permuton B as follows: sample y uniformly at random from [0 , 1] . Now if y is outside of all intervals Hi, we sample x uniformly at random from [0 , 1] 

(informally, apply the uniform permuton). Otherwise, y lies in some Hj . Suppose Hj = ( a, b ). Represent y

as y = (1 − λ)a + λb with λ ∈ [0 , 1] . If Hj is labeled I, we let x = λ. If Hj is labeled D, we let x = 1 − λ.Observe that every (finite) up-combination is a core deterministic IDU permuton. Consider an up-combination α1I β1D γ1U . . . αrI βrD γrU (where some coefficients may be equal to 0, meaning that the corresponding terms are absent). Coefficients αi, β i, γ i define a partition of [0 , 1] into intervals 

Ai, B i, C i. The corresponding family H in the definition of the core deterministic permuton consists of all segments Ai and Bi (but not Ci); intervals Ai are labeled with I and intervals Bi are labeled with D.As a remark, we note that it is possible that the complement of ⋃ Hi – informally the uniform part – has positive measure yet does not contain any intervals. That is the reason why we have not included any segments labeled U in the definition of the core deterministic IDU permuton. It is convenient to define an alternative sampling procedure for core deterministic IDU permutons. 

Claim 7.2 (Alternative Sampling Procedure) . Consider a core deterministic IDU permuton B and a param-eter n. Consider the following two sampling procedures: 

• Standard sampling. Sample n points (Xi, Y i) independently from the measure B. Let ρ be the pattern of {(Xi, Y i)}i∈[n].

• Alternative sampling. Sample random variables Y ′ 

> i

independently and uniformly from [0 , 1] . Define a permutation ρ′ ∈ Sn as follows: ρ′(i) < ρ ′(j) if one of the following holds: 

25 – Y ′ 

> i

< Y ′ 

> j

and there is no interval H ∈ H containing both Y ′ 

> i

and Y ′

> j

– i < j and Y ′ 

> i

, Y ′ 

> j

∈ H for some H ∈ H labeled I

– i > j and Y ′ 

> i

, Y ′ 

> j

∈ H for some H ∈ H labeled D

Then the distributions over permutations ρ and ρ′ produced by the two procedures are identical. Proof. We couple the two distributions of permutations. Independently and uniformly sample Y ′ 

> i

and Xi

for i ∈ [n]. Sort all Xi:

Xσ(1) < · · · < X σ(n)

(with probability 1, there are no ties). Let Y ′′  

> σ(i)

= Y ′ 

> i

for i ∈ [n]. Since σ is uniformly distributed in Sn

and independent of the random variables Y ′ 

> i

, the variables Y ′′  

> i

are also uniformly distributed on [0 , 1] , and all variables {Xi, Y ′′  

> j

} are independent. We are now ready to define Yi so that the distribution of {(Xi, Y i)}i matches that produced by the standard sampling procedure (see Figure 6). • If Y ′′  

> i

lies outside all intervals H ∈ H , let Yi = Y ′′  

> i

.• If Y ′′  

> i

∈ [a, b ] ∈ H and [a, b ] is labeled I, set Yi = a + ( b − a)Xi.• If Y ′′  

> i

∈ [a, b ] ∈ H and [a, b ] is labeled D, set Yi = b − (b − a)Xi.Since the points (Xi, Y ′′  

> i

) are independent and each (Xi, Y i) is determined by (Xi, Y ′′  

> i

), the points 

(Xi, Y i) are also independent. Moreover, each Xi is uniformly distributed on (0 , 1) , which is the x-marginal of B, as required. We now verify that the conditional distributions of Yi given Xi are the same in our procedure and in the distribution B.In both distributions, the conditional probability that Yi ∈ [a, b ] ∈ H equals b − a, and when this event occurs, either Yi = a + ( b − a)Xi or Yi = b − (b − a)Xi, depending on the label of [a, b ]. The probability that Yi ∈ U = [0 , 1] \ ⋃ 

> H∈H

H is λ(U ), and in both cases, Yi is uniformly distributed on U conditioned on 

Yi ∈ U .It remains to verify that ρ and ρ′ are equal. Consider i < j . We have ρ(i) < ρ (j) if and only if 

Yσ(i) < Y σ(j). We consider several cases. • Y ′ 

> i

= Y ′′  

> σ(i)

and Y ′ 

> j

= Y ′′  

> σ(j)

do not both lie in the same interval [a, b ] ∈ H . Then Yσ(i) < Y σ(j) if and only if 

Y ′ 

> i

= Y ′′  

> σ(i)

< Y ′′  

> σ(j)

= Y ′ 

> j

.

• Y ′ 

> i

, Y ′ 

> j

∈ [a, b ] ∈ H and [a, b ] is labeled I. Then Yσ(i) = a+( b−a)Xσ(i) and Yσ(j) = a+( b−a)Xσ(j).Since the Xσ(i) are sorted and b − a > 0, we have Yσ(i) < Y σ(j), and thus ρ(i) < ρ (j).• Y ′ 

> i

, Y ′ 

> j

∈ [a, b ] ∈ H and [a, b ] is labeled D. Then Yσ(i) = b−(b−a)Xσ(i) and Yσ(j) = b−(b−a)Xσ(j).Since −(b − a) < 0, we have Yσ(i) > Y σ(j), and thus ρ(i) > ρ (j).We conclude that for i < j , we have ρ(i) < ρ (j) if and only if either (i) Y ′ 

> i

, Y ′ 

> j

do not lie in the same interval of H and Y ′ 

> i

< Y ′ 

> j

, or (ii) both lie in an interval labeled I. This is precisely the condition for 

ρ′(i) < ρ ′(j).Now we state the main theorem of this section. 

Theorem 7.3. Consider a strong IDU permuton R. Then R is a probability distribution over core deter-ministic IDU permutons. 

26 7.2 Proof of Theorem 7.3 

Proof. First, we apply the same trick as in the proof of Lemma 6.4. Define an infinite sequence of disjoint intervals in (0 , 1) as follows. 

Qt = (1 − 21−t, 1 − 2−t), t = 1 , 2, . . . . 

Consider the following sampling procedure: • Sample a deterministic permuton P from R.• Independently sample (Xi, Y i) from P conditioned on Xi ∈ Qi for every positive integer i.• For every i < j , define Zij to be 1 if Yi < Y j and −1 if Yi > Y j (and 0 if Yi = Yj ; this happens with probability 0 since the y-marginal of P is uniform on [0 , 1] ). We will now show that Zij is a contractible array. Recall the definition of a contractible array from the theory of exchangeable random variables and arrays (see [26, 27]). 

Definition 7.4 (Contractible array) . A random array (Zij )1≤i<j< ∞ taking values in R is called (jointly) 

contractible if, for every strictly increasing map c : N → N,

(Zij )1≤i<j< ∞ d

= ( Zc(i),c (j))1≤i<j< ∞.

We will need Kallenberg’s representation theorem for contractible arrays [26]. 

Theorem 7.5 (Kallenberg’s representation for contractible arrays, restated) . Let (Zij )1≤i<j< ∞ be a con-tractible array. There exists a measurable function f : [0 , 1] 4 → R so that the following holds. Consider independent random variables S, (Ti)i∈N, and (Uij )1≤i<j< ∞ uniformly distributed on [0 , 1] . Then 

(Zij )1≤i<j< ∞ d

= (f (S, T i, T j , U ij ))

> 1≤i<j< ∞

.

We now verify that the array (Zij ) defined above is contractible. Indeed, let c be an increasing function. For every k, the distributions of patterns (X1, Y 1), . . . , (Xk, Y k) and (Xc(1) , Y c(1) ), . . . , (Xc(k), Y c(k)) are the same, since R defines a strong IDU transformation. Since (Zij )1≤i<j ≤k is determined by the pattern of points (X1, Y 1), . . . , (Xk, Y k), we get that 

(Zij )1≤i<j ≤k d

= ( Zc(i),c (j))1≤i<j ≤k.

Since this holds for every k,

(Zij )i<j d

= ( Zc(i),c (j))i<j .

We conclude that (Zij ) is contractible. Applying Kallenberg’s representation theorem, we get that there exists a measurable function f : [0 , 1] 4 → {− 1, 0, 1} such that 

Zij = f (S, T i, T j , U ij )

almost surely (where all random variables are defined on an appropriate refinement of the original probability space). Further, we may assume that this equality holds for all values of S almost surely (over the random choice of Ti, Tj , and Uij ) by removing a measure 0 set of S values. We will later show that f does not depend on the last argument Uij with probability 1 (over the choice of S, Ti and Tj ). For fixed s, t1, and t2̸ = t1, write t1 ←s t2 if f (s, t 1, t 2, U ) = 1 with positive probability over the random choice of U . Similarly, write t1 →s t2 if f (s, t 1, t 2, U ) = −1 with positive probability over the 27 random choice of U . If both t1 ←s t2 and t1 →s t2, write t1 ↔s t2. If only t1 ←s t2, write t1 ⇐s t2; if only t1 →s t2, write t1 ⇒s t2. (Importantly, the events T1 ←S T2 and T2 →S T1 are generally different; likewise, the events T1 ⇐S T2 and T2 ⇒S T1 need not coincide.) We now show that t1 ←s t2 satisfies many properties of a linear order. Importantly, however, it may happen with positive probability that T1 ←S T2 and T2 ←S T1.

Lemma 7.6. The following events hold. 1. For every t1̸ = t2, t1 ←S t2 or t1 →S t2 (always). 2. For every t1̸ = t2, at most one of the following holds: t1 ⇐S t2 or t1 ⇒S t2 (always). 3. If T1 ←S T2 and T2 ←S T3, then T1 ⇐S T3 (almost surely). 4. If T1 ←S T2 and T1 →S T3, then T2 ⇒S T3 (almost surely). 5. If T1 →S T2 and T1 ←S T3, then T2 ⇐S T3 (almost surely). 6. The probability that T1 ↔S T2 is 0. Equivalently, exactly one of the conditions T1 ⇐S T2 and 

T1 ⇒S T2 holds with probability 1. Proof. Item 1 follows directly from the definitions of ←s and →s. The probabilities that f (s, t 1, t 2, U ) = 1 

and f (s, t 1, t 2, U ) = −1 add up to 1, and thus at least one of them is positive. Item 2 is trivial, since the requirements for T1 ⇐S T2 and T1 ⇒S T2 are mutually exclusive. For item 3, observe that if Z12 = 1 and Z23 = 1 , then Y1 < Y 2 and Y2 < Y 3 (see the procedure for generating the array Z), and thus Y1 < Y 3 and Z13 = 1 . Therefore, if f (S, T 1, T 2, U 12 ) = 1 and 

f (S, T 2, T 3, U 23 ) = 1 , then f (S, T 1, T 3, U 13 ) = 1 (almost surely). Almost surely in s, t1, t2, and t3, the following holds. If t1 ←s t2 and t2 ←s t3, then with positive prob-ability over (U12 , U 23 ), f (s, t 1, t 2, U 12 ) = 1 and f (s, t 2, t 3, U 23 ) = 1 , and therefore f (s, t 1, t 3, U 13 ) = 1 .However, f (s, t 1, t 3, U 13 ) does not depend on (U12 , U 23 ) (since the random variables Uij are independent). Thus, f (s, t 1, t 3, U 13 ) = 1 almost surely. We conclude that t1 ⇐s t3.The proofs of items 4 and 5 are completely analogous to that of item 3. Now we prove item 6. Assume to the contrary that T1 ↔S T2 with positive probability. Then for some set A of positive measure and every s ∈ A, T1 ↔s T2 with positive probability. Fix s ∈ A. Now, for some set Bs of positive measure and every t1 ∈ Bs, t1 ↔s T2 with positive probability. Thus (the probability below is over T2, T 3, T sampled independently and uniformly at random from (0 , 1) ), 

Pr( t1 ↔s T2 and t1 ↔s T3) = Pr( t1 ↔s T )2 > 0.

This inequality holds for all s ∈ A and t1 ∈ Bs.Therefore, the following event happens with positive probability: 

T1 ↔S T2 and T1 ↔S T3.

Observe that on one hand, T1 ←S T2 and T1 →S T3 imply that T2 ⇒S T3. On the other hand, T1 →S T2 and 

T1 ←S T3, imply that T2 ⇐S T3. But these two options are mutually exclusive. We get a contradiction. Lemma 7.6 proves that ⇐s and ⇒s satisfy many properties of a linear order with probability 1. To avoid unnecessary complications dealing with events of probability 0, we use Petrov’s General Removal Lemma [37] to redefine ←s and →s so that all items of Lemma 7.6 always hold for distinct t1, t2, t3

(alternatively, instead of directly using the General Removal Lemma, we can use the directed graphon theory). We say that t1 ∼s t2 if one of the following holds: 28 • both t1 ⇐s t2 and t2 ⇐s t1

• both t1 ⇒s t2 and t2 ⇒s t1

• t1 = t2.

Lemma 7.7. Relation ∼s satisfies the following properties. 1. The relation ∼s is an equivalence relation on [0 , 1] .2. Relation ⇐s satisfies the axioms of a total order on the equivalence classes of ∼s, except that it is not necessarily reflexive: it is antisymmetric, transitive, and every two distinct elements are comparable. 3. Relation ⇒s is the reverse order meaning that for t1 ≁s t2 if t1 ⇐s t2, then t2 ⇒s t1 and vice versa. 4. For every equivalence class C of ∼s, either t1 ⇐s t2 for every t1, t 2 ∈ C or t1 ⇒s t2 for every 

t1, t 2 ∈ C.Proof. First, it is immediate that ∼s is reflexive and symmetric. We now verify the following property: if 

t1 ∼s t2 and t2 ⇐s t3, then t1 ⇐s t3. If t1 = t2, the claim is trivial. Otherwise, we either have t1 ⇐s t2 or 

t2 ⇒s t1. In both cases, by items 3 and 5 of Lemma 7.6, we get that t1 ⇐s t3. Similarly, we prove that • if t1 ⇐s t2 and t2 ∼s t3, then t1 ⇐s t3.• if t1 ∼s t2 and t2 ⇒s t3, then t1 ⇒s t3.• if t1 ⇒s t2 and t2 ∼s t3, then t1 ⇒s t3.

Now we are ready to prove item 1. Assume that t1 ∼s t2 and t2 ∼s t3. If t2 = t3, the claim is trivial. So we assume that t2̸ = t3. Then either (a) t1 ∼s t2, t2 ⇐s t3, and t3 ⇐s t2 or (b) t1 ∼s t2, t2 ⇒s t3, and 

t3 ⇒s t2. In case (a), we have t1 ⇐s t3 and t3 ⇐s t1, and thus t1 ∼s t3. Similarly, in case (b), we have 

t1 ⇒s t3 and t3 ⇒s t1, and thus t1 ∼s t3.

Now we verify item 2. As shown above, whether t1 ⇐s t2 holds depends only on the equivalence classes of t1 and t2. If t1 ⇐s t2 and t2 ⇐s t1, then t1 ∼s t2. Therefore, the relation ⇐s is antisymmetric. It is transitive by Lemma 7.6, item 3. It remains to verify totality: for every t1 ≁s t2, either t1 ⇐s t2 or t2 ⇐s t1. Fix t1 ≁s t2. By Lemma 7.6, item 6, either t1 ⇐s t2 or t1 ⇒s t2. In the latter case, since t1 ≁s t2, t2 ⇒s t1 does not hold, and thus, again by Lemma 7.6, item 6, t2 ⇐s t1. We conclude that either t1 ⇐s t2 or t2 ⇐s t1, as required. 

We prove item 3. Assume that t1 ⇐s t2 and t1 ≁s t2. Then t2 ⇐s t1 does not hold (otherwise, we would have t1 ∼s t2). By item 6 of Lemma 7.6, it follows that t2 ⇒s t1, as required. The proof of the implication in the opposite direction is completely analogous. 

Finally, we prove item 4. Consider an equivalence class C of ∼s. Assume that C contains at least two distinct elements t1 and t2. Then, either t1 ⇐s t2 or t1 ⇒s t2. In the former case, for every t3 and t4 in C,we have t3 ∼s t1, t4 ∼s t2, and thus t3 ⇐s t4. In the latter case, similarly, for every t3 and t4 in C, we have 

t3 ⇒s t4.29 Now we “rearrange” [0 , 1] so that t1 ⇐s t2 agrees with the standard ordering ≤ on [0 , 1] when t1 ≁s t2.We construct the desired rearrangement map ηs as follows (where λ is the standard Lebesgue measure): 

Ms(t) = {t′ : ( t′ ≁s t and t′ ⇐s t) or (t′ ∼s t and t′ < t )}

ηs(t) = λ(Ms(t)) .

It is immediate that ηs is measure preserving, since the preimage of a segment [ηs(a), η s(b)] is the set 

Ms(b) \ Ms(a) of measure λ(Ms(b) \ Ms(a)) = ηs(b) − ηs(a). Let ˆTi = ηs(Ti). Note that random variables ˆTi are independent and uniformly distributed on [0 , 1] .For every equivalence class C of positive measure, consider its image under ηs. Clearly it is a segment. Let Hs be the set of all such segments. Further, label each segment H ∈ H s with I or D: if t1 ⇐s t2 for all 

t1, t 2 ∈ η−1 

> s

(H), we label H with I; otherwise, we label H with D. Write a ≃s b if a and b belong to the same segment in Hs.We obtain a simple characterization of when Yi < Y j (for i < j ): Yi < Y j if and only if Ti ⇐S Tj ,which holds if and only if • ˆTi < ˆTj and Ti̸ ≃S Tj , or • ˆTi, ˆTj ∈ H for some H ∈ H S labeled I.The above holds almost surely. For every fixed s, consider the core deterministic IDU permuton Bs

defined by the family of segments Hs with the prescribed labels. By Claim 7.2, the distribution of patterns defined by the permuton equals that given by the sample of Y ′ 

> i

= ˆTi.We conclude that R is a probability distribution over core deterministic IDU permutons Bs.

# 8 Approximating arbitrary permutons by IDU and ID combinations 

In this section, we use Theorem 7.3 to show that every strong IDU permuton can be approximated by a distribution of IDU or ID combinations. 

Theorem 8.1. For every strong IDU permuton R, every δ ∈ (0 , 1) and k, there exists a strong IDU permuton 

R′, which is a probability distribution over IDU combinations P ′, such that for every pattern ρ ∈ Sk′ with 

k′ ≤ k:

|d(ρ, R ) − d(ρ, R ′)| < δ. 

Further, the number of terms in each IDU combination P ′ is at most 2 

> δ
> (k
> 2
> )

+ 1 ≤ O(k2/δ ); the number of different IDU combinations in the support of the distribution is at most k! (we will later show that it is at most 2k−1). Proof. Consider a strong IDU permuton R and its k-profile – the vector of pattern densities (d(ρ, R )) ρ∈Sk .It equals the expectation of profiles (d(ρ, P )) ρ∈Sk where P is sampled from R. Now all profiles lie in a hyperplane in RSk of codimension 1, since the sum of all pattern densities equals 1. That is, all profiles lie in an affine space of dimension m = k! − 1. By Carathéodory’s theorem, the k-profile of R is a convex combination of at most m + 1 profiles of deterministic permutons P1, . . . , P m+1 from the support of R.Denote their weights in the convex combination by c1, . . . , c m+1 . As we will see later (see Corollary 10.5 in Section 10), all k-profiles actually lie in an affine space of dimension at most 2k−1 − 1, and thus we can reduce m to 2k−1 − 1.We obtained that for every pattern ρ ∈ Sk,

d(ρ, R ) = 

> m+1 ∑
> t=1

ctd(ρ, P t). (2) 30 Further, since the density d(ρ, R ) for ρ ∈ Sk′ with k′ < k is a linear combination of densities d(τ, R ) for 

τ ∈ Sk, we get that (2) holds not only for ρ ∈ Sk but also for all ρ ∈ Sk′ with k′ < k .Now we analyze each permuton Pt separately. By Theorem 7.3, each Pt is a core deterministic IDU permuton defined by a family of disjoint intervals H = Ht labeled with I and D.Let ε = δ/ (k

> 2
> )

. We remove all segments H in H whose length is at most ε. We keep the remaining segments as well as their labels; let H′ be the collection of the remaining segments. H′ defines a core permuton P ′ 

> t

with at most 1/ε segments. As discussed, every core permuton with at most 1/ε segments can be represented as an IDU combination with at most 2/ε + 1 terms. Now it remains to show that 

|d(ρ, P t) − d(ρ, P ′ 

> t

)| ≤ δ

for every pattern ρ ∈ Sk′ .We use Claim 7.2 to sample patterns ρ and ρ′ from permutons Pt and P ′ 

> t

, respectively. To this end, we set Xi = i/k ′ for i ∈ [k′] and sample Y1, . . . , Y k′ independently and uniformly from [0 , 1] . Now, for i < j ,we determine whether ρ(i) < ρ (j) or ρ(i) > ρ (j), and whether ρ′(i) < ρ ′(j) or ρ′(i) > ρ ′(j), according to the following rules. • Rule 1. No segment H ∈ H contains both Yi and Yj . If Yi < Y j , then ρ(i) < ρ (j) and ρ′(i) < ρ ′(j).If Yi > Y j , then ρ(i) > ρ (j) and ρ′(i) > ρ ′(j).• Rule 2. There exists a segment H ∈ H ′ labeled I containing both Yi and Yj . Then ρ(i) < ρ (j) and 

ρ′(i) < ρ ′(j).• Rule 3. There exists a segment H ∈ H ′ labeled D containing both Yi and Yj . Then ρ(i) > ρ (j) and 

ρ′(i) > ρ ′(j).• Rule 4. There exists a segment H ∈ H \ H ′ containing both Yi and Yj . The ordering of ρ(i) and ρ(j)

is determined by Rule 2 or Rule 3, depending on the label of H; however, the ordering of ρ′(i) and 

ρ′(j) is given by Rule 1. The only case in which the ordering of ρ(i) and ρ(j) may differ from that of ρ′(i) and ρ′(j) is when Rule 4 applies. Therefore, if Rule 4 is not applied for any pair i, j , then ρ = ρ′. The probability that Rule 4 is applied for some pair i, j is at most (here, λ denotes the Lebesgue measure on [0 , 1] ): 

> ∑
> i<j
> ∑
> H∈H\H ′

Pr( Yi, Y j ∈ H) ≤ ∑

> i<j
> ∑
> H∈H\H ′

λ(H)2 ≤

> (

k

2 

> ) ∑
> H∈H\H ′

λ(H) 

> 

· max  

> H∈H\H ′

λ(H)

≤

> (

k

2

> )

· 1 · ε = δ. 

Therefore, for no pattern ρ of length at most k do the densities in R and R′ differ by more than δ, as required. 

ID combinations As noted earlier, every strong IDU transformation can be alternatively approximated with a distribution of ID combinations (that is, IDU combinations without U terms). Consider a probability distribution over IDU combinations produced by Theorem 8.1. We approximate each IDU combination C with an ID combination as follows. Replace each term c U in C with an up-combination ct I . . . ct I of t = ⌈1/ε ⌉ terms. We now observe that the obtained distribution of ID combinations C′ approximates C within δ (as in Theorem 8.1). To this end, note that if we apply the segment removal step from Theorem 8.1 to C′, we will get back C. Thus, the densities of each pattern 

ρ ∈ Sk′ in C and in C′ differ by at most ε(k 

> 2
> )

= δ.We get the following corollary. 31 Theorem 8.2. For every strong IDU permuton R, every δ > 0 and k, there exists a probability distribution 

R′ over ID combinations P ′ such that for every pattern ρ ∈ Sk′ with k′ ≤ k:

|d(ρ, R ) − d(ρ, R ′)| ≤ δ. 

Further, the number of terms in each ID combination P ′ is at most O(k2/δ ); the number of different ID combinations in the support of the distribution is at most 2k−1.

# 9 A quasisymmetric polynomial characterization of profiles 

In this section, we will provide a characterization of k-profiles of strong IDU transformations using qua-sisymmetric polynomials. 

Definition 9.1 (Quasisymmetric polynomial of level-2; adapted from [38]) . Given N , consider two sets of variables x1, . . . , x N and y1, . . . , y N . We work in the ring of polynomials R[x1, . . . , x N , y 1, . . . , y N ]. A polynomial f ∈ R[x1, . . . , x N , y 1, . . . , y N ] is called a quasisymmetric polynomial of level-2 if, for every two sequences of indices i1 < i 2 < · · · < i k and j1 < j 2 < · · · < j k and every sequence of nonnegative exponents a1, b 1, a 2, b 2, . . . , a k, b k with ai + bi ≥ 1 for all i, the coefficients of monomials 

> k∏
> t=1

xat 

> it

ybt 

> it

and 

> k∏
> t=1

xat 

> jt

ybt

> jt

are equal. We denote the set of all quasisymmetric polynomials of level-2 in 2N variables by QSym (2)  

> N

.We define a linear order on the variables: x1, y 1, x 2, y 2, . . . , x N , y N . We write u ≺ v if variable u ∈{xi, y i}i appears before variable v ∈ { xi, y i}i in this order. For brevity, we will denote the vector of variables xi by x; the vector of variables yi by y.For a permutation π, we define the following π-partition function, which is a variant of Stembridge’s en-riched P -partition [44]. 

Definition 9.2 (π-partition function) . Consider a permutation π ∈ Sn. We say that f : [ n] → { xi, y i}1≤i≤N

is a π-partition function if for every i < j :• either f (i) ≺ f (j), or • π(i) < π (j) and f (i) = f (j) = xt for some t, or • π(i) > π (j) and f (i) = f (j) = yt for some t.Note that f is a non-decreasing function with respect to the order ≺: f (i) ⪯ f (j) for every i < j , and every strictly increasing function f is a π-partition function for all π. The permutation π determines at which positions f is allowed to stay constant. 

Definition 9.3. For a permutation π ∈ Sn, define a π-partition generating function Kπ,N (x, y ) as follows 

Kπ,N (x, y ) = ∑

> fn∏
> i=1

f (i),

where the sum is over all π-partition functions f .32 We note that this definition is different from Stembridge’s definition of a generating function. It is immediate that Kπ,N (x, y ) is a quasisymmetric polynomial of level-2. Now we connect the π-partition generating functions to pattern densities in ID combinations. Consider an ID combination C with at most N terms. We can write C as 

x1I y1D x2I y2D . . . xN I yN D, (3) where xi and yi are nonnegative real coefficients that sum to 1. Some of the coefficients xi and yi may be 0, indicating that the corresponding terms are missing. 

Theorem 9.4. Consider an ID combination C as in (3) . The density of a pattern π ∈ Sn in C equals 

d(π, C ) = Kπ−1,N (x, y ).

Importantly, the density of π equals the generating function for π−1, not for π itself. Proof. We use the alternative sampling procedure from Claim 7.2. We sample n random variables Yi –corresponding to Y ′ 

> i

in Claim 7.2 – independently and uniformly at random, and then define the permutation 

ρ according to this procedure. Our goal is to derive a formula for Pr( ρ = π) = d(π, C ) for a fixed π ∈ Sn.Define a function f as follows. For i ∈ [n], let i′ = π−1(i). Set f (i) = xt if Yi′ lies in the segment corresponding to xtI, and f (i) = yt if Yi′ lies in the segment corresponding to ytD. We will show that 

ρ = π if and only if f is a π−1-partition function. (Note that f is a random function that depends on the random variables Yi.) Assume first that π = ρ. We show that f is a π−1-partition function. Consider i < j and let i′ = π−1(i)

and j′ = π−1(j). Since ρ = π, ρ(i′) = i < j = ρ(j′). By Claim 7.2, this happens if and only if one of the following holds: • Yi′ , Y j′ lie in segments corresponding to different terms in the ID combination C and Yi′ < Y j′ . This condition is equivalent to f (i)̸ = f (j) and Yi′ < Y j′ , or, using the definition of ≺:

f (i) ≺ f (j).

• Both Yi′ , Y j′ lie in a segment corresponding to a term xtI in the ID combination C and i′ < j ′. This is equivalent to 

f (i) = f (j) = xt for some t and π−1(i) < π −1(j).

• Both Yi′ , Y j′ lie in a segment corresponding to a term ytD in the ID combination C and i′ > j ′. This is equivalent to 

f (i) = f (j) = yt for some t and π−1(i) > π −1(j).

We see that f satisfies the definition of a π−1-partition function. Conversely, assume that f is a π−1-partition function. We show that π = ρ. Consider i < j . Again, let 

i′ = π−1(i) and j′ = π−1(j). We consider the three possibilities from Definition 9.2. The first possibility is that f (i) ≺ f (j). Then Yi′ lies in a segment preceding that of Yj′ , and thus 

ρ(i′) < ρ (j′). Since π(i′) = i < j = π(j′), we conclude that π and ρ agree on the ordering of i′ and j′.Another possibility is that i′ = π−1(i) < π −1(j) = j′ and f (i) = f (j) = xt for some t. Since i′ < j ′

and both Yi′ and Yj′ lie in the segment for xtI, ρ(i′) < ρ (j′). Also, π(i′) = i < j = π(j′). So again π and 

ρ agree on the ordering of i′ and j′.The remaining possibility is that i′ = π−1(i) > π −1(j) = j′ and f (i) = f (j) = yt for some t. Since 

Yi′ and Yj′ lie in a segment for yt, the order of ρ(i′) and ρ(j′) is the opposite of that of i′ and j′. Thus, 

ρ(i′) < ρ (j′). Again, π and ρ agree on the ordering of i′ and j′.33 We conclude that π and ρ agree on all pairs i′ and j′. Since every unordered pair {i′, j ′} arises from some choice of 1 ≤ i < j ≤ n, it follows that π = ρ, as required. Finally, we observe that the probability that f equals a fixed π−1-partition function f0 is 

Pr ( f = f0) = Pr (f (π(i′)) = f0(π(i′)) for i′ ∈ [n]) (4) 

= Pr (Yi′ lies in a segment of length f0(π(i′)) for all i′ ∈ [n])

=

> n∏
> i′=1

Pr (Yi′ lies in a segment of length f0(π(i′)) )

=

> n∏
> i′=1

f0(π(i′)) = 

> n∏
> i=1

f0(i).

Therefore, 

d(π, C ) = Pr ( ρ = π) = ∑

> f0

Pr ( f = f0) = ∑

> f0
> n∏
> i=1

f0(i) = Kπ−1,N (x, y ),

where both summations are over π−1-partition functions f0.

Definition 9.5. Let Rk be the set of all k-profiles of strong IDU transformations. We will refer to Rk as the 

feasible region of k-profiles. 

Theorem 9.6. Consider the vector KN (x, y ) = ( Kπ−1,N (x, y )) π∈Sk with one component for each permu-tation π. Let Im( KN ) denote the image of the simplex 

{(x, y ) : xi, y i ≥ 0,

> N∑
> i=1

(xi + yi) = 1 }

under KN . Then the feasible region Rk satisfies 

Rk = conv   

> (∞⋃
> N=k

Im( KN )

> )

,

where conv( X) denotes the closed convex hull of X.Proof. Given any strong IDU permuton R and any precision δ > 0, by Theorem 8.2, we can find a random permuton R′ supported on at most 2k−1 different ID combinations (Corollary 10.5 ensures that 2k−1 suffices, though even the bound k! would be enough here) such that each combination has at most N terms (with N

depending on k and δ), and the k-profile of R′ is within δ (in each coordinate) of the k-profile of R. In turn, Theorem 9.4 shows that every ID combination C with at most N terms lies in the image of KN . Hence, the k-profile of R′ lies in conv(Im( KN )) . Letting δ → 0, we conclude that the k-profile of R lies in 

conv   

> (⋃
> N≥k

Im( KN )

> )

, as required. Conversely, every point in Im( KN ) corresponds to the k-profile of some ID combination, and thus belongs to Rk. Moreover, Rk is closed because the set of strong IDU permutons is compact. It is also convex, since for any two strong IDU permutons R1 and R2, the permuton R obtained by sampling from 

R1 with probability p and from R2 with probability 1 − p also defines a strong IDU transformation. Now we prove a lemma that will be useful when we discuss labeled flags in Section 13. Fix n and 

k ≤ n. Consider an ID combination C given by (3): 

C = x1I y1D x2I y2D . . . xN I yN D. (5) 34 Suppose we are given a set S of k points in the support of C; no two points share the same x- or y-coordinate. Let (X1, Y 1), . . . , (Xk, Y k) be the points from S sorted by their x-coordinates. Independently sample the remaining n − k points {(Xj , Y j )}nj=k+1 from C. Define the outcome of the sampling to be the pair (σ, A ),where: • σ is the pattern of the points {(Xi, Y i)}ni=1 ;• A ⊆ [n] is the set of ranks of X1, . . . , X k among all X1, . . . , X n.List the elements of A in increasing order as A = ( j1, . . . , j k) with j1 < · · · < j k. Define ∆ji = ji−ji−1−1

for i ∈ [k + 1] , where j0 = 0 and jk+1 = n + 1 , and set ∆j = (∆ j1, . . . , ∆jk+1 ) ∈ Rk+1 . The coordinates 

X1 < X 2 < · · · < X k divide the interval [0 , 1] into k + 1 intervals; let z1, . . . , z k+1 be their lengths (from left to right). Finally, we define a sequence g1, . . . , g k. The ID combination C defines a partition of [0 , 1] 2 into rectangles corresponding to the individual terms in C: [0 , 1] × [0 , x 1], [0 , 1] × [x1, x 1 + y1], [0 , 1] × [x1 +

y1, x 1 + y1 + x2], etc. If (Xi, Y i) lies in the rectangle for the term xtI, we let gi = xt; if (Xi, Y i) lies in the rectangle for the term ytD, we let gi = yt.

Lemma 9.7. Consider the sampling procedure as described above. Fix π ∈ Sn and A = {j1, . . . , j k}. The probability of sampling (π, A ) equals 

M (∆ j)

> k+1

∏

> i=1

z∆ji 

> i

· ∑

> f

∏ 

> π−1(i)/∈A

f (i),

where the sum is over all π−1-partition functions f such that f (π(ji)) = gi for every i ∈ [k]. See Section 4.3 for the definition of M (∆ j).Proof. We restate the desired probability as a conditional probability. We assume that we independently sample all {(Xi, Y i)}ni=1 from C. Consider three events: • Eπ is the event that points (X1, Y 1), . . . , (Xn, Y n) have pattern π;• ES is the event that {(X1, Y 1), . . . , (Xk, Y k)} = S and X1 < · · · < X k;• EA is the event that the rank of each Xi among X1, . . . , X n is ji for i ∈ [k].Then the desired probability of sampling (π, A ) equals 

Pr ( Eπ and EA | E S ) = Pr ( Eπ | E S and EA) · Pr ( EA | E S )

We first obtain a formula for Pr ( EA | E S ). Conditioned on ES , X1, . . . , X k partition [0 , 1] into k+1 segments of lengths z1, . . . , z k+1 . All variables Xk+1 , . . . , X n are independent and uniformly distributed on [0 , 1] .Therefore, the event EA given ES occurs when among n − k random variables Xk+1 , . . . , X n exactly ∆ji

lie in segment i (of length zi) for every i ∈ [k + 1] . The probability of this event is 

( n − k

∆j1, . . . , ∆jk+1 

) k+1 ∏

> j=1

z∆jj 

> j

= M (∆ j)

> k+1

∏

> j=1

z∆jj 

> j

. (6) To obtain a formula for Pr ( Eπ | E S and EA), we slightly revise the proof of Theorem 9.4. Specifically, we revise formula (4) for the probability of f = f0. Given the conditioning, the values of Yi′ for i′ ∈ A are 35 already fixed. If f0(π(ji)) ̸ = gi for some i ∈ [k], then the conditional probability that Yi′ lies in the required segment is 0; if f0(π(ji)) = gi, then this conditional probability is 1. We obtain the following formula 

Pr ( f = f0 | E S and EA) =   

> {∏
> π−1(i)/∈A

f0(i), if f0(π(ji)) = gi for i ∈ [k]0, otherwise. (7) Combining (6) and (7), we obtain the desired formula. In this section, we constructed level-2 quasisymmetric polynomials that capture finite ID combinations. Analogously, we can define level-3 quasisymmetric polynomials to represent IDU combinations. Although we will primarily use ID combinations to prove theoretical results, IDU combinations are often more con-venient when working with specific ordering CSPs. We briefly provide the necessary definitions without formal proofs, as the arguments are completely analogous to those for ID combinations. We consider an up-combination C of the form: 

C = x1I y1D z1U x2I y2D z2U . . . xN I yN D zN U. (8) A function f : [ n] → { xi, y i, z i}1≤i≤N is a π-partition function for the IDU combination (8) if for every 

i < j and some t, either f (i) = f (j) = zt, or it satisfies the same conditions as a π-partition function for an ID combination: f (i) ≺ f (j), or π(i) < π (j) and f (i) = f (j) = xt, or π(i) > π (j) and f (i) = f (j) = yt.Next, we define the generating function for (8): 

Kπ,N (x, y, z ) = ∑ 

> f
> ∏ni=1

f (i) 

> ∏Nj=1

|f −1(zj )|! ,

where the sum is over all π-partition functions f for the IDU combination (8). Now, 

d(π, C ) = Kπ−1,N (x, y, z ). (9) 

# 10 Equivalence in the density of permutations with matching inverse up– down signatures 

Recall the definition of the up–down signature of a permutation given in Definition 2.6. In this section, we first show that if two permutations π1 and π2 satisfy π−11 ∼ud π−12 , then they have the same pattern density under every strong IDU transformation. We then show that this property characterizes strong IDU transformations: if, for a weak IDU transformation σ, it holds that d(π1, σ n) = d(π2, σ n) for all π1 and π2

with π−11 ∼ud π−12 and all n ≥ | π1| = |π2|, then σ is a strong IDU transformation. 

Claim 10.1. Consider two permutations ρ1 and ρ2 with ρ1 ∼ud ρ2 (see Definition 2.6). Then: 

• f is a ρ1-partition function if and only if it is a ρ2-partition function; 

• Kρ1,N (x, y ) = Kρ2,N (x, y ).Proof. Assume, for contradiction, that f is a ρ1-partition function but not a ρ2-partition function. Then there exist i < j such that f satisfies one of the three conditions for being a ρ1-partition function but does not satisfy any of the corresponding conditions for ρ2. We consider the ρ1-partition condition that f satisfies. There are three cases. 

Case 1. The condition is f (i) ≺ f (j). This condition does not depend on the permutation; therefore, if f

satisfies it for ρ1, it also satisfies it for ρ2.36 Case 2. The condition is ρ(i) < ρ (j) and f (i) = f (j) = xt for some t. Assume that it holds for ρ = ρ1 but not for ρ = ρ2. Since f (i) = f (j) and f is non-decreasing, we have f (ℓ) = xt for all ℓ ∈ { i, . . . , j }. Hence, 

f (ℓ) = f (ℓ+1) = xt for all ℓ ∈ { i, . . . , j −1}. Since f is a ρ1-partition function and f (ℓ) = f (ℓ+1) = xt,we have ρ1(ℓ) < ρ 1(ℓ + 1) for all ℓ ∈ { i, . . . , j − 1}. Thus, the up–down signature ud-sign( ρ1) has a u at every position ℓ ∈ { i, . . . , j − 1}. Since ρ1 and ρ2 have the same up–down signatures, ud-sign( ρ2) also has 

u at all such positions. We therefore conclude that ρ2(i) < ρ 2(j), and hence, contrary to our assumption, f

also satisfies the ρ2-partition condition for the indices i and j.

Case 3. The condition is ρ(i) > ρ (j) and f (i) = f (j) = yt for some t. The analysis is analogous to that of Case 2. Since the set F of ρ-partition functions depends only on the up–down signature of ρ, we obtain 

Kρ1,N (x, y ) = ∑ 

> f∈F
> n∏
> i=1

f (i) = Kρ2,N (x, y ).

Letting ρ1 = π−11 , ρ2 = π−12 and combining this claim with Theorem 9.4, we get the following corollary. 

Corollary 10.2. For every two permutations π1 and π2 with π−11 ∼ud π−12 , and every ID combination C,

d(π1, C ) = d(π2, C ).

Now we introduce the notion of inverse-signature invariance : an IDU transformation is inverse-signature-invariant if the densities of patterns π1 and π2 are the same for all π1 and π2 with π−11 ∼ud π−12 .

Definition 10.3 (Inverse-signature invariance) . A random permuton R is inverse-signature-invariant if 

d(π, R ) = ∆ R(ud-sign( π−1)) 

for some function ∆R on up–down signatures and all permutations π.A weak IDU transformation {σn} is inverse-signature-invariant if 

d(π, σ n) = ∆ σ(ud-sign( π−1)) 

for some function ∆σ on up–down signatures, all permutations π, and n ≥ | π|.We will refer to ∆R and ∆σ as the inverse-signature profiles of R and σ = {σn}, respectively. Now we extend Claim 10.1 to all strong IDU transformations. 

Theorem 10.4. Every strong IDU permuton R is inverse-signature-invariant. Proof. Consider π1 and π2 with π−11 ∼ud π−12 . Every strong IDU permuton R can be approximated by a distribution of ID combinations C within any desired δ > 0 (by Theorem 8.2). By Corollary 10.2, for every such ID combination C, we have d(π1, C ) = d(π2, C ). Considering the limit when δ goes to 0, we get that 

d(π1, R ) = d(π2, R ).Thus all permutations are divided into equivalence classes according to the up–down signatures of their inverses. The number of such equivalence classes for permutations in Sk is 2k−1 (the number of possible up–down signatures of length k − 1). Taking into account that the sum of densities of all ρ ∈ Sk is 1, we get the following corollary. 37 Figure 7: The figure shows the plot of the permutation β = ( 1 5 2 4 3 ) (black dots connected by black lines) and the permutation β(3 ,3) = ( 1 6 3 2 5 4 ) (black dots together with one red dot, connected by red lines). Segments common to both plots are indicated by alternating black–red dashed lines. 

Corollary 10.5. All k-profiles of strong IDU transformations lie in an affine space of dimension 2k−1 − 1.

Now we provide a characterization of strong IDU transformations using inverse-signature invariance. 

Theorem 10.6. 

1. If a random permuton R is inverse-signature-invariant, then it defines a strong IDU transformation. 2. If a weak IDU transformation {σn} is inverse-signature-invariant, then it is a strong IDU transformation. Proof. 1. Consider an inverse-signature-invariant random permuton R. R defines a consistent weak IDU transformation {σn} (see Definition 4.3). We will need the following auxiliary definition. 

Definition 10.7. Consider a permutation β ∈ Sn. We define the operation of inserting a new entry (x, y )

into β with x, y ∈ [n + 1] . To provide more intuition, we offer three equivalent definitions. Write β in one-line notation as (β(1) , . . . , β (n)) . Insert the value y between positions x − 1 and x (after the change, y will be at position x). After that, increment all previously present values β(i) ≥ y by 1 (to avoid repetitions). We obtain the one-line representation of β(x,y ).Now we provide a more explicit description of the same procedure. Consider the graph of β: {(i, β (i)) : 

i ∈ [n]} (see Figure 7). Modify the graph as follows: move all points to the right of x one unit to the right; move all points above y one unit up; then add the point (x, y ). We obtain a set of n + 1 points: 

{(shift x(i), shift y(β(i))) : i ∈ [n]} ∪ { (x, y )} where shift t(j) = 

> {

j, if j < t j + 1 , if j ≥ t. 

Let β(x,y ) be the permutation on [n + 1] with this graph. Finally, note that β(x,y ) is the pattern of the set of points {(i, β (i)) : i ∈ [n]} ∪ { (x − 1/2, y − 1/2)}.

Observation 10.8. Note that for β ∈ Sn and i ∈ [n],

β(i,β (i)) = β(i+1 ,β (i)+1) and β(i,β (i)+1) = β(i+1 ,β (i)) .

Both permutations in the first identity are obtained by replacing (i, β (i)) with a two-point pattern (1 2 ); both permutations in the second identity are obtained by replacing (i, β (i)) with a two-point pattern (2 1 ).38 z

q

z

q

Figure 8: The figure shows the plot of the permutation τ = ( 1 5 2 4 3 ) (black dots). Recall that τ = ρ−1.The plot of τ(y,q ) is obtained by inserting one red dot into the plot (and shifting the other dots accordingly), while the plot of τ(y,q +1) is obtained by inserting one blue dot. In this example, q = 2 . The left panel illustrates that the up–down signatures of τ(y,q ) and τ(y,q +1) coincide for y = 2 ; the ud-signatures at positions 

1 and 2, where the permutations differ, are uu in both cases. The right panel shows that the signatures of 

τ(y,q ) and τ(y+1 ,q +1) coincide for y = y0 = 3 .Now we prove the key lemma, from which the theorem will follow. 

Lemma 10.9. Let ρ ∈ Sn. Let J and J′ be subsets of [n + 1] of size n (that is, each is obtained by removing a single element from [n + 1] ). Then, 

dJ (ρ, σ n+1 ) = dJ′ (ρ, σ n+1 ).

Proof. We first prove the statement for J = [ n + 1] \ { q} and J′ = [ n + 1] \ { q + 1 } for some q ∈ [n].Observe that patt( σn+1 , J ) = ρ if and only if σn+1 = ρ(q,y ) for some y ∈ [n + 1] . Therefore, 

dJ (ρ, σ n+1 ) = 

> n+1

∑

> y=1

Pr( σn+1 = ρ(q,y )).

Similarly, 

dJ′ (ρ, σ n+1 ) = 

> n+1

∑

> y=1

Pr( σn+1 = ρ(q+1 ,y )).

By our assumption the IDU transformation {σn} is inverse-signature-invariant, and thus Pr ( σn+1 = τ )

depends only on the up–down signature of τ −1. Therefore, to prove that dJ (ρ, σ n+1 ) = dJ′ (ρ, σ n+1 ), it suffices to show that for every y ∈ [n + 1] , the multisets of up–down signatures 

{ud-sign(( ρ(q,y ))−1)}y∈[n+1] and {ud-sign(( ρ(q+1 ,y ))−1)}y∈[n+1] 

are equal (including multiplicities). At this point, it will be convenient to switch from permutations ρ and ρ(x,y ) to their inverses (see Fig-ure 8). Let τ = ρ−1. Note that (ρ(x,y ))−1 = τ(y,x ). Now, we need to show 

{ud-sign( τ(y,q ))}y∈[n+1] = {ud-sign( τ(y,q +1) )}y∈[n+1] 

(where both sides are multisets). For a fixed y, permutations τ(y,q ) and τ(y,q +1) differ only at two positions: 39 • τ(y,q ) : y 7 → q and τ(y,q +1) : y 7 → q + 1 .• for z = shift y(τ −1(q)) : τ(y,q ) : z 7 → q + 1 and τ(y,q +1) : z 7 → q.Further, the difference between values at these positions is exactly 1. Therefore, the only pair of indices 

{a, b } such that τ(y,q )(a) < τ (y,q )(b) but τ(y,q +1) (a) > τ (y,q +1) (b) or the other way around is {y, z }.If y and z are not next to each other (that is, |y − z| > 1), then both permutations τ(y,q ) and τ(y,q +1) have the same up–down signatures (even though τ(y,q ) and τ(y,q +1) are not equal). The only cases when the signatures may differ are when z = y − 1 or z = y + 1 . That is, when 

y = y0 def 

= τ −1(q) or y = y0 + 1 . Since τ (y0) = q, by Observation 10.8, we have 

τ(y0,q ) = τ(y0+1 ,q +1) and τ(y0+1 ,q ) = τ(y0,q +1) 

and thus 

ud-sign( τ(y0,q )) = ud-sign( τ(y0+1 ,q +1) ) and ud-sign( τ(y0+1 ,q )) = ud-sign( τ(y0,q +1) ).

We showed that dJ (ρ, σ n+1 ) = dJ′ (ρ, σ n+1 ) for J = [ n + 1] \ { q} and J′ = [ n + 1] \ { q + 1 } for all q.This implies that this equality actually holds for all J, J ′ ⊂ [n + 1] of size n.We have shown that the distribution of patt( σn+1 , J ) does not depend on the particular choice of J of size n. Further, let ˆJ be a random n-element subset of [n + 1] . Since σ is a consistent IDU, we get for every subset J of size n

patt( σn+1 , J ) d

= patt( σn+1 , ˆJ) d

= σn.

Now consider a subset Jk of size k ≤ n. For i ∈ { k + 1 , . . . , n + 1 }, let Ji be the set obtained by adding the i − k smallest elements from [n + 1] \ Jk to Jk. Then 

Jk ⊂ Jk+1 ⊂ · · · ⊂ Jn ⊂ Jn+1 = [ n + 1] 

with |Ji| = i for all i.We prove by induction on i, going from n down to k, that 

patt( σn+1 , J i) d

= σi.

We have already established the base case i = n. Let a be the single element of Ji+1 \ Ji; note that a has rank a in Ji+1 . Then 

patt( σn+1 , J i) = patt(patt( σn+1 , J i+1 ), [i + 1] \ { a}]) d

= patt( σi+1 , [i + 1] \ { a}) d

= σi.

Hence, for every J ⊆ [n+1] , the distribution of patt( σn+1 , J ) depends only on the size of J. Replacing 

n + 1 with n, we get 

dJ (ρ, σ n) = d(ρ, σ n) = d(ρ, R ),

as required. We conclude that R is a strong IDU transformation. 2. Now consider an inverse-signature-invariant weak IDU transformation σ. We verify that σ satisfies the condition of consistency and thus is defined by a random permuton R. Accordingly, item 1 applies. Indeed, the consistency condition requires that for every ρ ∈ Sk, every n ≥ k,

d(ρ, σ n) = d(ρ, σ k).

In our case, both are equal to ∆σ(ud-sign( ρ−1)) .40 In this section, we identified a set of linear dependencies for pattern densities of strong IDU permutons 

R. Namely, 

d(ρ1, R ) − d(ρ2, R ) = 0 for ρ−11 ∼ud ρ−12 . (10) Also, pattern densities satisfy arbitrary linear combinations of (10). To complete the picture, we show that there are no other nontrivial linear dependencies among permutation densities {d(σ, R )} that hold for all strong IDU permutons R.

Theorem 10.10. Let ρ1, . . . , ρ t ∈ Sn with ρ−1

> i

̸ ∼ud ρ−1 

> j

for all i̸ = j, and let c1, . . . , c t ∈ R. Assume that for every strong IDU permuton R, we have 

> t∑
> i=1

cid(ρi, R ) = 0 

Then all ci = 0 .Proof. Without loss of generality, we may assume that all ci are nonzero; if some are zero, we exclude the corresponding terms. If t = 0 , then we are done. We now get a contradiction with the assumption that t ≥ 1.Let πj = ρ−1 

> j

. For each permutation πj , consider its up–down signature ud-sign( πj ) and partition it into maximal blocks of consecutive u’s and d’s, with the first block consisting of u’s (possibly empty). Define the sequence (a1, a 2, . . . ) as follows: • The length of the sequence equals the number of blocks. • For i ≥ 2, ai is the length of block i.• a1 is the length of block 1 plus 1. Note that ∑ ai = n. The sequence (a1, a 2, . . . ) uniquely determines the up–down signature of πj , and thus the sequences for distinct πj are different. Among all sequences for different πj , take the largest one in lexicographic order and denote it by a∗. Let N be its length. Denote the sequence for πj∗ by a∗.Consider an ID combination C as in (3): 

C = x1I y1D x2I y2D . . . xN I yN D. (11) For now, the values of xi and yi are not fixed. Define a πj∗ -partition function f that maps the first a1 natural numbers to x1, the next a2 numbers to y1,the next a3 numbers to x2, and so on. It is immediate that f is indeed a πj∗ -partition function. Further, observe that it is not a πj -partition function for any j̸ = j∗: if it were, then the corresponding sequence a′

for πj would be larger than a∗ in lexicographic order. Note that ∑ti=1 cid(ρi, C ) is a multivariate polynomial in {xi, y i}i:

F (x, y ) def 

=

> t∑
> i=1

cid(ρi, C ) = 

> t∑
> i=1

ciKπi,N (x, y ).

By our assumption, ∑ti=1 cid(ρi, R ) = 0 for all strong IDU permutons R. In particular, F (x, y ) = 0 as long as ∑

> i

(xi + yi) = 1 and all xi, y i ≥ 0. However, since F is homogeneous, F (λx, λy ) = λnF (x, y ),so F remains 0 for all x and y with xi, y i ≥ 0 even if ∑(xi + yi)̸ = 1 . Therefore, F is identically zero as a polynomial; that is, all its coefficients are 0. The coefficient of ∏ni=1 f (i) in Kπj∗ ,N (x, y ) equals 1, and ∏ni=1 f (i) appears only in Kπj∗ ,N (x, y ) (as 

f is not a πj -partition function for any other πj ). Hence, its coefficient in F (x, y ) equals cj∗̸ = 0 . We obtain a contradiction. 41 11 Computing a nearly optimal strong IDU transformation 

In this section, we discuss how to compute a nearly optimal strong IDU transformation for a given ordering CSP with predicates of arity at most k. By Theorem 2.4, our goal is to find a weak IDU transformation that maximizes p(Π ′ → Π, σ). As shown in Theorem 6.7, it is sufficient to consider only strong IDU transformations. For a strong IDU transformation R,

p(φ′ → φ, R ) = min  

> τ∈Sat( φ′)

∑

> ρ∈Sat( φ)

d(ρτ −1, R ).

By Theorem 8.2, every strong IDU transformation R can be approximated within any desired precision δ > 

0 by a distribution over ID combinations with at most N terms, where N = O(k2/δ ).Each of the k-profile vectors corresponding to these ID combinations lies in the image of KN (see The-orem 9.6). Thus, the problem of finding an approximately optimal strong IDU transformation for CSP(Π) 

reduces to the following optimization problem: Find 2k−1 pairs of vectors (x(i), y(i)) ∈ R2N and a vector of weights p = ( p1, . . . , p 2k−1 ) such that ∥x(i)∥1 + ∥y(i)∥1 = 1 for all i, ∥p∥1 = 1 , and all variables are nonnegative, in order to maximize 

min  

> φ∈Π

min  

> τ∈Sat( φ′)

∑

> ρ∈Sat( φ)2k−1

∑

> i=1

piKτ ρ −1,N (x(i), y(i)).

Note that Kψ,N is a homogeneous polynomial of degree k with positive terms for every ψ ∈ Sk. Let 1N

denote the vector of all ones. Then 

∂K ψ,N (x, y)

∂x i

≤ ∂K ψ,N (1N , 1N )

∂x i

≤ k · Kψ,N (1N , 1N ) = k · (2 N )k · Kψ,N 

( 1N

2N , 1N

2N

)

.

Thus, ∂∂x i

∑

> ρ∈Sat( φ)

Kτ ρ −1,N ≤ k · (2 N )k ∑

> ρ∈Sat( φ)

Kτ ρ −1,N 

( 1N

2N , 1N

2N

)

≤ k · (2 N )k,

since Kτ ρ −1,N (1N /(2 N ), 1N /(2 N )) corresponds to a valid permuton 12N I 12N D . . . 12N I 12N D,and the sum of the densities of permutations τ ρ −1 in it is at most 1. The same bound holds for the partial derivative with respect to yi. It follows that, if two vectors (x, y) and (x′, y′) differ by at most ε = δ/ (2 k ·

N · (2 N )k) in each coordinate, then the difference between the values of the objective function at these points is at most δ. Since N = O(k2/δ ),

ε = δ/ (2 k · N · (2 N )k) ≥ (δ/k )O(k).

This optimization problem can be solved to any desired accuracy O(δ) by brute force, by discretizing both the simplex for each (x(i), y(i)) with step ε and the simplex of weights p with step δ/ 2k−1. The total number of points is (1 /ε )O(2 k N ) · (2 k−1/δ )2k−1

= ( k/δ )O(2 k k3/δ ).The running time of the algorithm depends only on k and the desired precision δ. The resulting distri-bution over ID combinations has bit complexity depending only on k and δ. For every n, we can sample a permutation of length n from this distribution in time O(f (k, δ ) n), that is, in time linear in n.

Theorem 11.1. There exists an algorithm that, given a constraint language Π and its relaxation Π′, as well as a desired precision δ > 0, finds a convex combination R′ of ID combinations such that 

p(Π ′ → Π, R ′) ≥ p(Π ′ → Π, R ∗) − δ, 

42 where R∗ is the optimal strong IDU transformation for Π and Π′. The running time of the algorithm and the bit complexity of R′ depend only on k and δ.Given n, we can sample a permutation σn of length n from R′ in time O(g(k, δ ) n), that is, in time linear in n.

# 12 Simple sufficient condition for nontrivial approximation 

In this section, we present a simple sufficient condition for a CSP problem CSP( φ) to have a nontrivial approximation or, in other words, to not be approximation resistant. Consider a predicate φ(x1, . . . , x k) and a relaxation φ′ of φ (which may be φL, φR, or φε). We are interested in finding a strong IDU permuton R

such that 

p(φ′ → φ, R ) > | Sat( φ)|

k! .

We begin with the following observation: the uniform permuton U gives a | Sat( φ)|/k! approximation and thus our goal is to find a strong IDU permuton R that beats U . This motivates the following question: For a given φ, is there a “perturbation” R of U with p(φ′ → φ, R ) > p (φ′ → φ, U ) (note the strict inequality)? Now, if for some R we get p(φ′ → φ, R ) > p (φ′ → φ, U ) then the inequality also holds for R′ 

> ε

=

εR (1 −ε)U and R′ 

> ε

→ U as ε → 0 (w.r.t. the standard weak-topology on the space of random permutons). However, we are not interested in perturbations like this and instead will require that Rε is a mixture of deterministic permutons Pε, and each Pε in the mixture converges to U as ε → 0.We note that focusing only on perturbations of U significantly restricts the set of possible options, and thus we can only hope to get a sufficient condition – but not a criterion – for when φ admits a nontrivial approximation. Furthermore, to obtain a simple condition, we will only consider first-order perturbations, as described below. Using the formula for p(φ′ → φ, R ), we see that R yields a nontrivial approximation for φ if and only if for every τ ∈ Sat( φ′), ∑ 

> ρ∈Sat( φ)τ−1

d(ρ, R ) > ∑ 

> ρ∈Sat( φ)τ−1

d(ρ, U ),

or equivalently ∑ 

> ρ∈Sat( φ)τ−1

(d(ρ, R ) − d(ρ, U )) > 0.

Previously, we defined the up–down signature of permutations as sequences of letters u and d. In this section, it will be convenient to use +1 and −1 instead of u and d, respectively. We will denote a vector signature with ±1 entries by ud-sign ±(τ ). Further, for given φ and τ ∈ Sk, let 

v(φ, τ ) = ∑ 

> ρ∈Sat( φ)τ−1

ud-sign ±(ρ−1) ∈ Zk−1. (12) Now, we define IDU combinations A(x, ε ) and B(x, ε ) as follows: 

A(x, ε ) = x

1 + ε U ε

1 + ε I 1 − x

1 + ε UB(x, ε ) = x

1 + ε U ε

1 + ε D 1 − x

1 + ε U. 

43 We think of both A(x, ε ) and B(x, ε ) as perturbations of U , since A(x, ε ) → U and B(x, ε ) → U as ε → 0

for every fixed x ∈ (0 , 1) . We note that A(·) and B(·) are as powerful as arbitrary perturbations of U for the purpose of the first-order analysis. For the sake of analysis, we also define: 

C(x, ε ) = x

1 + ε U ε

1 + ε U 1 − x

1 + ε U = U. 

Consider a permutation ρ ∈ Sk. Let s = ud-sign ±(ρ−1). Using formula (9), we write approximations for d(ρ, A (x, ε )) , d(ρ, B (x, ε )) , and d(ρ, C (x, ε )) up to terms of order O(ε3). In (9), we consider ρ−1-partition functions f . Since the coefficients in the formulas for A, B, and C are not variables, it is more convenient to assume that f maps [k] to the three terms in the up-combination formulas for A, B, and C,rather than to their coefficients. Accordingly, we let f map the first a numbers to the first term in the IDU combination, the next 0, 1, or 2 numbers to the second term (partition functions that map more than two numbers to the second term contribute only O(ε3) terms), and the remaining ones to the third term. Since the definition of a partition function allows any consecutive block of numbers to be mapped to the same term of the form cU , the only restriction is the following: f can map both a + 1 and a + 2 to ε 

> 1+ ε

I (resp.  

> ε
> 1+ ε

D) only if sa+1 = 1 (resp. sa+1 = −1). Denote γ = 1(1+ ε)k . Below, “’ ≈” will denote equality up to O(ε3). We have, 

d(ρ, A (x, ε )) ≈ γ



> k

∑

> a=0

xa(1 − x)k−a

a!( k − a)! +

> k−1

∑

> a=0

xa(1 − x)k−1−a

a!( k − 1 − a)! ε + ∑

> a:sa+1 =1

xa(1 − x)k−2−a

a!( k − 2 − a)! ε2



d(ρ, B (x, ε )) ≈ γ



> k

∑

> a=0

xa(1 − x)k−a

a!( k − a)! +

> k−1

∑

> a=0

xa(1 − x)k−1−a

a!( k − 1 − a)! ε + ∑

> a:sa+1 =−1

xa(1 − x)k−2−a

a!( k − 2 − a)! ε2



d(ρ, C (x, ε )) ≈ γ

( k∑

> a=0

xa(1 − x)k−a

a!( k − a)! +

> k−1

∑

> a=0

xa(1 − x)k−1−a

a!( k − 1 − a)! ε +

> k−2

∑

> a=0

xa(1 − x)k−2−a

a!( k − 2 − a)! 

ε2

2

)

We obtain simpler expressions for the following differences: 

d(ρ, A (x, ε )) − d(ρ, C (x, ε )) ≈ − (d(ρ, B (x, ε )) − d(ρ, C (x, ε ))) ≈ γ

> k−2

∑

> a=0

sa+1 

xa(1 − x)k−2−a

a!( k − 2 − a)! 

ε2

2 .

Consider a random permuton Rε that is a mixture of permutons A(xi, ε ) and B(xi, ε ) with some nonnegative weights αi and βi that add up to 1, where xi are distinct reals from (0 , 1) and i ∈ [N ] for some N . Using the fact that the mixture of C(xi, ε ) with weights αi + βi equals U , we have 

d(ρ, R ε) − d(ρ, U ) ≈ γε 2

2

> N

∑

> i=1
> k−2

∑

> a=0

sa+1 

xai (1 − xi)k−2−a(αi − βi)

a!( k − 2 − a)! .

Therefore, 

∑ 

> ρ∈Sat( φ)τ−1

(d(ρ, R ε) − d(ρ, U )) ≈ γε 2

2

> k−2

∑

> a=0

va+1 (φ, τ )

> N

∑

> i=1

xai (1 − xi)k−2−a(αi − βi)

a!( k − 2 − a)! .

Define a (k−1) ×N matrix M by Mbi = xb−1  

> i(1 −xi)k−1−b
> (b−1)!( k−1−b)!

. We have M = D1V D 2, where V is a rectangular Vandermonde matrix with entries (xi/(1 −xi))b−1, D1 and D2 are diagonal matrices with diagonal entries 44 1/(b−1)!( k−1−b)! and (1 − xi)k−2, respectively. As such, it has rank min( N, k − 1) . Let α be the vector of αi

and β be the vector of βi. 

> ∑
> ρ∈Sat( φ)τ−1

(d(ρ, R ε) − d(ρ, U )) ≈ γε 2

2 · v(φ, τ )⊺M (α − β).

Our goal now is to choose N , distinct xi ∈ (0 , 1) , and α and β so that v(φ, τ )⊺ M (α − β) > 0 for every τ ∈ Sat( φ′). We observe that, for every vector y ∈ Rk−1, we can choose N , xi, α, and β so that 

M (α − β) = δy for some δ > 0. Indeed, choose N = k − 1 and pick arbitrary distinct xi ∈ (0 , 1) . Now, let z = M −1y. Define ˜αi = zi if zi > 0 and 0, otherwise; ˜βi = −zi if zi < 0 and 0 otherwise. Note that 

z = ˜ α − ˜β. Finally, normalize ˜α and ˜β by setting δ = 1 /(∥˜α∥1 + ∥ ˜β∥1), α = δ ˜α and β = δ ˜β. Then 

M (α − β) = δM (˜ α − ˜β) = δM z = δy. 

We obtain the following sufficient condition for the existence of the first-order perturbation Rε for φ:there exists a vector y ∈ Rk−1 such that ⟨y, v (φ, τ )⟩ > 0 for all τ ∈ Sat( φ′).4 Using LP duality, this condition can be stated as follows. 

Theorem 12.1. Consider a predicate φ of arity k and a relaxation φ′ of φ. Assume that 0 is not in the convex hull of the vectors {v(φ, τ )}τ ∈Sat( φ′) defined by (12) or, equivalently, for some y ∈ Rk−1,

⟨y, v (φ, τ )⟩ > 0 for all τ ∈ Sat( φ′).

Then p(φ′ → φ, R ) > | Sat( φ)|/k! for some strong IDU permuton R. If φ′ = φL or φ′ = φR, then φ admits a nontrivial approximation in the satisfiable regime. If φ′ = φε, then φ admits a nontrivial approximation in both the satisfiable and nearly-satisfiable regimes. 

# 13 Flag algebras for strong IDU transformations 

13.1 Overview of flag algebras for permutations 

We begin with an overview of the flag algebra method for permutations. Flag algebras were introduced by Razborov [41] and provide a powerful framework for obtaining density inequalities for graphs, permuta-tions, and other combinatorial structures. Following the pioneering work of Balogh, Hu, Lidick` y, Pikhurko, Udvari, and Volec [4], which applied flag algebras to permutations, the technique has been widely used to study permutation pattern densities. Consequently, it provides a strong tool for proving density inequalities – particularly upper bounds – for IDU transformations. We refer the reader to [41, 4, 19] for a detailed introduction to flag algebras. Here, we provide only the necessary background. We write permutations in one-line notation; for example, (1, 2, 3) denotes the identity permutation of length 3, and (2, 1, 3) is the transposition that swaps the first two elements. A flag algebra generalizes the linear space of density sums introduced in Section 4.2. It extends simple density sums in two important ways. First, we identify two density sums if they are equal in all permutons. For instance, since d(( 1 2 ), P ) + d(( 2 1 ), P ) = 1 for every permuton P , we write (1 2 ) + ( 2 1 ) = 1 . Second, in addition to summation, we define a multiplication operation on density sums such that for density sums 

Σ1 and Σ2:

d(Σ 1 · Σ2, P ) = d(Σ 1, P ) · d(Σ 2, P )

for every deterministic permuton P . Note that this multiplication operation is unrelated to permutation multiplication (composition). 

> 4The condition is also necessary as long as we are restricted to the first-order perturbation analysis.

45 Most importantly, we consider typed density sums. Recall that given a permuton P , we can sample a permutation σn of length n by choosing n points (x1, y 1), . . . , (xn, y n) according to P and taking the pattern defined by these points. Now suppose we have fixed a subset S of k points in the support of P with no two points in S sharing the same x- or y-coordinate. We call these points fixed or labeled points and refer to (P, S ) as a tagged permuton . To sample a permutation σn from (P, S ), we sample the remaining 

n − k points and define σn as the pattern of all n points. We say that an index i is labeled or tagged if its corresponding point is one of the k fixed points. Let J be the set of all labeled indices. The pair (σn, J ) is then a flag . Thus, we have described a procedure for sampling flags from a tagged permuton (P, S ).Note that the pattern τ = patt( σn, J ) coincides with the one defined by S and therefore does not depend on the specific random permutation sampled from (P, S ). We refer to τ as the type of both (P, S )

and (σn, J ). We define the density d(( ρ, J ), (P, S )) of a flag (ρ, J ) in (P, S ) as the probability that the sampled flag equals (ρ, J ).As is standard in the literature, when we look at specific examples, we will underline the indices that belong to J. For example, (1 3 4 2 ) denotes the flag (( 1 3 4 2 ), {1, 3}) of type (1 2 ). As we will see shortly, we can define addition and multiplication of flags of the same type. We now provide the formal definitions. 

Definition 13.1. Let τ ∈ Sk. A flag of type τ is a pair (π, J ), where π ∈ Sn for some n ≥ k and J ⊆ [n] is a set of size k such that patt( π, J ) = τ . We denote by Fτ the set of all flags of type τ .Further, let RFτ denote the set of all formal linear combinations of flags of type τ with real coefficients. We refer to elements of RFτ as typed density sums . Addition of typed density sums is defined in the standard way, and the density function d(·, (P, S )) extends to them by linearity. We identify (τ, [k]) with 1 in RFτ , since d(( τ, [k]) , (P, S )) is always equal to 1. In this definition, we allow k = 0 . In this case, J = ∅ and S = ∅; all flags have the trivial type ∅.We now define multiplication of typed density sums. 

Definition 13.2. Fix a type τ ∈ Sk. Consider two flags (π1, J 1) and (π2, J 2) of type τ , where π1 ∈ Sn1 and 

π2 ∈ Sn2 . Let n = n1 + n2 − k. We define their product (π1, J 1) · (π2, J 2) as 

(π1, J 1) · (π2, J 2) = ∑

> π∈Sn
> J:|J|=k

cπ,J (π, J ),

where coefficients cπ,J are defined as follows. Sample a random subset A of size n1 − k from [n] \ J, and let B = [ n] \ (J ∪ A). Then cπ,J is the probability of the following event: • patt( π, A ∪ J) = π1,• the positions of indices from J in the sorted list A ∪ J equal J1,• patt( π, B ∪ J) = π2, and • the positions of indices from J in the sorted list B ∪ J equal J2.The definition of multiplication is extended to typed density sums by linearity. Importantly, for any tagged permuton (P, S ) of type τ we have the identity 

d(( π1, J 1) · (π2, J 2), (P, S )) = d(( π1, J 1), (P, S )) · d(( π2, J 2), (P, S )) . (13) Next, we identify typed density sums that take the same value in all tagged permutons of type τ . To this end, we first describe sums that are identically zero. While this set is often specified explicitly, we instead define it as the principal ideal generated by a specific element β − 1.46 Definition 13.3. Consider a type τ ∈ Sk. Define 

β = ∑  

> (σ,J )is of type τσ∈Sk+1

(σ, J ).

Let Kτ = ⟨β − 1⟩ be the principal ideal in RFτ generated by β − 1. We define the flag algebra Aτ as the quotient algebra 

Aτ = RFτ /K τ .

We choose β as above since d(β, (P, S )) = 1 for every tagged permuton (P, S ) of type τ , and consequently 

d(g, (P, S )) = 0 for every g ∈ Kτ .The elements of Aτ are equivalence classes of typed density sums. We note that the function g 7 →

d(g, (P, S )) is a homomorphism from Aτ to R. Moreover, for every flag f ∈ F τ , the density d(f, (P, S )) 

is positive. Hence, we refer to this homomorphism as a positive homomorphism . The converse also holds: every positive homomorphism from Aτ to R is of the form d(·, (P, S )) for some tagged permuton (P, S ) of type τ .

13.2 Flag algebras and semidefinite programming 

From a practical standpoint, the most important property of flag algebras is that for every g ∈ A τ , the density of g2 def 

= g · g in any tagged permuton (P, S ) of type τ is nonnegative: 

d(g2, (P, S )) = d(g, (P, S )) 2 ≥ 0.

As our ultimate goal is to prove inequalities for untagged density sums, we consider the following operator corresponding to averaging over all random choices of fixed points in a tagged permuton. 

Definition 13.4. The operation J·K : Aτ → A ∅ is defined by 

J(π, J )K = 1 

> (nk
> )

π. 

(As is standard, we identify π and (π, ∅) in A∅.) Importantly, J·K is a linear operator, though not a homomorphism. This discussion leads to a semidefinite programming framework for establishing density inequalities. 

Fact 13.5. For every g ∈ A τ and every permuton P ,

d(Jg2K, P ) ≥ 0.

Consider a type τ ∈ Sk and a finite set of flags f1, . . . , f n of type τ . Let F be the matrix with entries 

Fij = Jfi · fj K. Then, for every positive semidefinite matrix Q ∈ Rn×n, we have 

Q ◦ F = ∑

> i,j

Qij Jfifj K =

t∑

> i,j

Qij fifj

|

.

Note that ∑

> i,j

Qij fifj

47 is a sum of squares of elements of Aτ (to see this, write Q as a sum of rank-one positive semidefinite matrices). Therefore, Q ◦ F ≥ 0 constitutes a valid density inequality. This yields a practical approach to proving density inequalities: choose an appropriate type τ and flags 

f1, . . . , f n, construct the matrix F , and find a matrix Q that produces the desired inequality via semidefinite programming. In this section, we have discussed pattern and flag densities only for deterministic permutons. For example, identity (13) holds for every deterministic tagged permuton but does not generally hold for random permutons. However, any linear inequality on pattern densities that holds for deterministic permutons also holds for random permutons, since the densities of a random permuton are convex combinations of those of deterministic ones. 

13.3 Flag algebra for strong IDU transformations 

We now adapt the flag algebra framework to analyze strong IDU transformations. As we have seen, strong IDU transformations are inverse-signature-invariant and we want to incorporate this property into the flag algebra framework. Since the above condition involves inverses of permutations, it is more convenient to work with transposed permutons for strong IDU transformations, as defined below. For a deterministic permuton P , define its transposed permuton P ⊺ by 

P ⊺(A) = P ({(y, x ) : ( x, y ) ∈ A}).

We say that a deterministic permuton P is a T -permuton if P ⊺ defines a strong IDU transformation. Note that for every pattern π,

d(π, P ⊺) = d(π−1, P ).

Thus, results for T -permutons immediately translate into those for strong IDU transformations. First, consider the unlabeled flag algebra for T -permutons. Since permutations with the same up–down signature have the same density in T -permutons, we identify such permutations in the flag algebra. Formally, let 

N = {π1 − π2 ∈ A ∅ : ud-sign( π1) = ud-sign( π2)}.

Now consider the typed flag algebra Aτ for a type τ ∈ Sk. In addition to the up–down signature, we consider π|J , the restriction of π to J (this is not the pattern patt( π, J ) but simply the sequence of values of π at positions in J). The elements of π(J) partition the set [n] into k + 1 intervals (some possibly empty), which we refer to as blocks . It will be convenient to describe π(J) in terms of the sizes of these blocks. 

Definition 13.6 (Partition vector) . The partition vector part( π, J ) of a flag (π, J ) is defined as 

part( π, J ) = ( i1 − 1, i 2 − i1 − 1, . . . , n − ik),

where i1, . . . , i k are the elements of π(J) in increasing order. Note that J, part( π, J ), and τ together uniquely determine π|J (and vice versa). Consider the product of two flags (π1, J 1) and (π2, J 2) of type τ . Let c (π′, J ′) be a nonzero term in their product (π1, J 1) · (π2, J 2)

in RFτ . Then it follows immediately that 

part( π′, J ′) = part( π1, J 1) + part( π2, J 2).

Finally, define 

N τ = {(π1, J ) − (π2, J ) ∈ A τ : ud-sign( π1) = ud-sign( π2) and part( π1, J ) = part( π2, J )}.

Let RN τ be the linear span of N τ . We write a ≡ b (mod RN τ ) if a − b ∈ RN τ .48 Theorem 13.7. 

1. For every g ∈ RN τ and every tagged T -permuton (P, S ) of type τ ,

d(g, (P, S )) = 0 

equivalently, for g1, g 2 ∈ A τ , if g1 ≡ g2 (mod RN τ ), then 

d(g1, (P, S )) = d(g2, (P, S )) .

2. If g ∈ RN τ , then JgK = 0 (mod RN ).3. RN τ is an ideal in Aτ .

We defer the proof of Theorem 13.7 to Section 15. Now, we discuss the implications of this theorem to the flag algebra framework for T -permutons. Recall that our general approach is to choose a type τ and n

flags f1, . . . , f n ∈ F τ , construct the matrix F with entries Fij = Jfi · fj K, and find a positive semidefinite matrix Q such that Q ◦ F yields the desired density inequality. The theorem shows that we can choose the flags f1, . . . , f n from the quotient algebra Aτ /RN τ or, in other words, choose at most one representative from each equivalence class modulo RN τ . Further, we will provide a simplified multiplication rule for typed density sums modulo RN τ in Theorem 15.9. 

# 14 Analysis of ordering CSPs of arity 3 and 4 

In this section, we apply our framework to ordering CSPs defined by a single predicate of arity 3 or 4. We will write most derivations modulo N ∅. Thus, (udu ) will denote a flag algebra element π ∈ A ∅ with 

ud-sign( π) = udu . Since all such elements are equivalent modulo N ∅, the choice of a specific element will not matter. Further, we will write inequalities for pattern densities as 

(uu ) + ( dd ) − 13 ≥ 0,

meaning that for every T -permuton R,

d(( uu ) + ( dd ), R ) ≥ 13 .

Similarly, 

min ((uu ) + ( dd ), 2( ud )) ≤ 1/2

is a shortcut for 

min ( d(( uu ) + ( dd ), R ), d (2( ud ), R )) ≤ 1/2

for all T -permutons R.

14.1 Ordering CSPs of arity 3 

In this section, we analyze ordering CSPs of arity 3 using our approach. There are 11 non-isomorphic, nontrivial ordering predicates of arity 3, excluding the two trivial ones, “always true” and “always false” (see also Figure 2). This includes the single nontrivial predicate x1 < x 2 of arity 2 (viewed as a predicate of arity 3 by adding a dummy variable x3); it appears in the list below as φ3. Completely satisfiable instances of four of them are polynomially tractable; here are the predicates described by their satisfying permutations: 

φ1 = {(1 2 3 )},φ2 = {(1 2 3 ), (1 3 2 )},φ3 = {(1 2 3 ), (1 3 2 ), (2 3 1 )},φ4 = {(1 2 3 ), (1 3 2 ), (2 1 3 ), (2 3 1 )}.

49 Further, φ1, φ2, and φ3 are precedence predicates (see Definition 1.2); therefore, nearly satisfiable instances of these predicates admit an approximation ratio of 1 − O(log n log log n) ε, as discussed in Section 3.3. Among the remaining predicates, four have trivial φL and φR relaxations (the relaxations are equal to the “always true” predicate); therefore, our framework cannot provide any nontrivial approximation guarantees for these four predicates. All predicates have trivial φε relaxations. However, there are three predicates with nontrivial φL and φR relaxations: 

φ5 = {(1 2 3 ), (3 2 1 )},φ6 = {(1 2 3 ), (2 3 1 )},φ7 = {(1 2 3 ), (1 3 2 ), (3 1 2 )}.

Note that predicate φ5 is Betweenness , studied by Chor and Sudan [18]. We list the L- and R-relaxations of φ5, φ6, and φ7 below. Note that Betweenness is self-dual and its L- and R-relaxations are dual to each other. Therefore, both of these relaxations yield the same approximation factor for Betweenness. 

φ5L = {(1 2 3 ), (1 3 2 ), (2 3 1 ), (3 2 1 )},φ5R = {(1 2 3 ), (2 1 3 ), (3 1 2 ), (3 2 1 )},φ6L = φ6R = {(1 2 3 ), (1 3 2 ), (2 3 1 )},φ7L = {(1 2 3 ), (1 3 2 ), (2 1 3 ), (3 1 2 )}.

For each of these relaxations φ′ (except for φ5R, which is equivalent to φ5L), we write the expression for p(φ′ → φ, ·) modulo RN (that is, we only keep track of the up–down signatures). 

φ5 : min ((uu ) + ( dd ), (uu ) + ( dd ), 2( ud ), 2( ud )) = min ((uu ) + ( dd ), 2( ud )),φ6 : min ((ud ) + ( du ), (uu ) + ( du ), (uu ) + ( ud )),φ7 : min ((uu ) + ( du ) + ( dd ), (uu ) + ( ud ) + ( dd ), 2( ud ) + ( du ), (uu ) + 2( ud )).

We analyze these one by one. For Betweenness, we need to find a T -permuton P that maximizes 

min ((uu ) + ( dd ), 2( ud )). We use a T -permuton (see Figure 5) 

P = ( 12 I 12 D)⊺.

(In retrospect, this is equivalent to the transformation used in [34].) Using Theorem 9.4, it can be immedi-ately verified that 

d(( uu ) + ( dd ), P ) = d(2( ud ), P ) = 1/2.

Now let us prove an upper bound on the approximability of φ5 in our framework. Note that 

d

>  ∑
> π∈S3

π, P  

> 

= 1 . (14) Since there is one permutation in S3 with signature uu (the identity permutation), one with signature dd (the decreasing permutation), and two each with signatures ud and du , we get 

(uu ) + ( dd ) + 2( ud ) + 2( du ) = 1 .

Since all densities are nonnegative, we have 

(uu ) + ( dd ) + 2( ud ) ≤ 1.

50 (uu )

(dd ) 

> 1
> 111/3
> 1/3

Figure 9: The plot depicts the convex hull of achievable densities (uu ) and (dd ) in T -permutons. The boundary forms a polygonal curve composed of infinitely many segments. All feasible points lie above and to the right of the dashed line (uu ) + ( dd ) = 1/3. The point (1/6, 1/6) represents the uniform permuton. The lower envelope is approximated by the parabola (uu ) + ( dd ) = 1/3 + 2/3(( uu ) − (dd )) 2 (shown in gray). Therefore, 

min ((uu ) + ( dd ), 2( ud )) ≤ 1/2.

Thus, the best approximation factor for Betweenness achievable using our approach is 1/2. We can also con-sider a slightly more general ordering CSP with the constraint language consisting of Betweenness and the less-than predicate x1 < x 2. As the less-than predicate equals its own L- and R-relaxations, the probability 

p(‘ < ’ → ‘ < ’, P ) (where ‘ <’ is the less-than predicate) is equal to the density of (1 2 ) in P . Now, 

d(( 1 2 ), P ) = 1/2. That is, we can get a 1/2-approximation for this more general ordering CSP as well. Now consider the predicate φ6. Before we show that it does not admit a nontrivial approximation using our framework, we need to prove that (uu ) + ( dd ) ≥ 1/3 (this lower bound is achieved by the uniform permuton). We perform computations in A(1)/RN (1). A dot in a signature identifies the position of a labeled index. Here, all flags written as (xx .xx ) have partition vector (2 , 2) . For example, (dd .dd ) denotes the equivalence class of (1 2 3 4 5 ); (ud .du ) denotes the equivalence class of (1 4 3 2 5 ).

r

(( u.u) − (d.d)) 2z

= 23

q(dd .dd ) + ( dd .du ) − 2( du .du ) − (du .ud )+ ( du .uu ) + ( ud .dd ) − (ud .du ) − 2( ud .ud ) + ( uu .ud ) + ( uu .uu )y

= 215 

> (

(dddd ) + ( dddu ) − 2( dudu ) − (duud )+ ( duuu ) + ( uddd ) − (uddu ) − 2( udud ) + ( uuud ) + ( uuuu ))

= 15

> (

(uu ) + ( dd ) − 13

> )

.

We conclude that (uu ) + ( dd ) − 13 ≥ 0. We have, 

(ud ) + ( du ) = 1 − (( uu ) + ( dd )) 2 ≤ 1 − 1/32 = 13 .

We conclude that φ6 does not admit an approximation better than 1/3, which is what random ordering gives. Finally, we consider φ7. We prove that it also does not admit any nontrivial approximation using our framework. We have, 

(( uu ) + ( du ) + ( dd )) + (2( ud ) + ( du )) = ( uu ) + 2( ud ) + 2( du ) + ( dd ) = 1 .

51 Therefore, either (uu ) + ( du ) + ( dd ) ≤ 1/2 or 2( ud ) + ( du ) ≤ 1/2. We conclude that φ7 does not admit an approximation better than the trivial one of 1/2 using our framework. 

14.2 Two examples of ordering CSPs of arity 4 

In this section, we provide two concrete examples of predicates of arity 4 that admit a nontrivial approxima-tion using our framework. Among numerous examples, we chose two for which the computations are quite simple. In particular, in these examples we use IDU transformations defined by deterministic permutons, while many others require random, non-deterministic ones. Consider the following ordering CSP: 

φ(x1, x 2, x 3, x 4) = ( x1 < x 2 < x 3 < x 4) ∨ (x4 < x 1 < x 2 < x 3)

with Sat( φ) = {(1 2 3 4 ), (2 3 4 1 )}. It is easy to verify that the L, R, and ε-relaxations of φ are equal: 

φL = φR = φε = ( x1 < x 2 < x 3),

and Sat( φε) = {(1 2 3 4 ), (1 2 4 3 ), (1 3 4 2 ), (2 3 4 1 )}. We compute p(φε → φ, R ) for a strong random permuton R:

p(φε → φ, R ) = min( 

d(( 1 2 3 4 ) · (1 2 3 4 )−1 + ( 2 3 4 1 ) · (1 2 3 4 )−1, R ),d(( 1 2 3 4 ) · (1 2 4 3 )−1 + ( 2 3 4 1 ) · (1 2 4 3 )−1, R ),d(( 1 2 3 4 ) · (1 3 4 2 )−1 + ( 2 3 4 1 ) · (1 3 4 2 )−1, R ),d(( 1 2 3 4 ) · (2 3 4 1 )−1 + ( 2 3 4 1 ) · (2 3 4 1 )−1, R )) = min( 

d(( 1 2 3 4 ) + ( 2 3 4 1 ), R ),d(( 1 2 4 3 ) + ( 2 3 1 4 ), R ),d(( 1 4 2 3 ) + ( 2 1 3 4 ), R ),d(( 4 1 2 3 ) + ( 1 2 3 4 ), R )) = min( 

d(( 1 2 3 4 ) + ( 4 1 2 3 ), R ⊺),d(( 1 2 4 3 ) + ( 3 1 2 4 ), R ⊺),d(( 1 3 4 2 ) + ( 2 1 3 4 ), R ⊺),d(( 2 3 4 1 ) + ( 1 2 3 4 ), R ⊺))) .

Write up–down signatures of these permutations: 

p(φε → φ, R ) = min( d(( uuu ) + ( duu ), R ⊺), d (( uud ) + ( duu ), R ⊺),d(( uud ) + ( duu ), R ⊺), d (( uud ) + ( uuu ), R ⊺)) = min( d(( uuu ) + ( duu ), R ⊺), d (( uuu ) + ( uud ), R ⊺), d (( uud ) + ( duu ), R ⊺)) .

As a warm-up, we note that Theorem 12.1 implies that p(φε → φ, R ) > 1/12 (the trivial approximation factor) for some IDU permuton R. From the signatures above, we deduce that the vectors v(φ, τ ), as in Theorem 12.1, are 

(0 , 2, 2) = (1 , 1, 1) + ( −1, 1, 1) , (2 , 2, 0) = (1 , 1, 1) + (1 , 1, −1) , (0 , 2, 0) = (1 , 1, −1) + ( −1, 1, 1) .

52 We see that these vectors have strictly positive inner products with y = (1 , 1, 1) , and thus Theorem 12.1 applies. However, the theorem does not yield an explicit approximation factor. Now let R be the deterministic permuton yD xI yD , where x + 2 y = 1 and x, y ≥ 0. We compute the densities of patterns with the following signatures w.r.t. R⊺:

(uuu ) : x4 + 2 x3y + x2y2

(uud ), (duu ) : x3y + 2 x2y2 + xy 3

Plugging these expressions into the formula for p(φε → φ, R ) and simplifying the obtained algebraic expressions, we get 

p(φε → φ, R ) = min 

( x(1 + x)3

8 , x + x2 − x3 − x4

4

)

.

We now find x that maximizes f (x) = x+x2−x3−x4 

> 4

. Write 

f ′(x) = 1 + 2 x − 3x2 − 4x3

4 = (1 + x)(1 + x − 4x2)4 .

Polynomial 1 + x − 4x2 has roots 1±√17 8 . Thus, the only root of f ′(x) on (0 , 1) is 1+ √17 8 (the other two roots, −1 and (1 − √17) /8 are negative). For this value of x, we get 

min 

( x(1 + x)3

8 , x + x2 − x3 − x4

4

)

= min 

( 701 + 181 √17 4096 , 107 + 51 √17 2048 

)

= 107 + 51 √17 2048 = 0 .1549 . . . 

Corollary 14.1. There is a polynomial-time approximation algorithm for predicate φ(x1, x 2, x 3, x 4) = (x1 < x 2 < x 3 < x 4) ∨ (x4 < x 1 < x 2 < x 3) that, given a 1 − ε satisfiable instance (with ε ≥ 0), returns a solution that satisfies at least an α − O(ε log n log log n) fraction of the constraints, where 

α = 107 + 51 √17 2048 = 0 .1549 . . . 

Note that the random ordering algorithm satisfies a 

| Sat( φ)|

4! = 224 = 112 = 0 .08(3) 

fraction of the constraints. Now we briefly describe another example of an ordering CSP of arity 4. Consider 

φ(x1, x 2, x 3, x 4) = ( x1 < x 2 < x 3 < x 4) ∨ (x1 < x 4 < x 3 < x 2).

For this predicate, the three relaxations φε, φL, and φR are distinct: 

φε(x1, x 2, x 3, x 4) = ( x1 < x 2) ∧ (x1 < x 3) ∧ (x1 < x 4)

φL(x1, x 2, x 3, x 4) = φε(x1, x 2, x 3, x 4) ∧ NFirst( x3, x 2, x 4)

φR(x1, x 2, x 3, x 4) = φε(x1, x 2, x 3, x 4) ∧ NLast( x3, x 2, x 4)

53 We get the following formulas for p(· → φ, R ). Recall that although we write p(φ′ → φ, R ) for a strong permuton R, when we express this quantity using up–down signatures we write the corresponding densities with respect to R⊺.

p(φε → φ, R ) = min( d(2( uud ), R ⊺), d (2( udu ), R ⊺), d (( uuu ) + ( udd ), R ⊺)) 

p(φL → φ, R ) = min( d(2( uud ), R ⊺), d (( uuu ) + ( udd ), R ⊺)) 

p(φR → φ, R ) = min( d(2( udu ), R ⊺), d (( uuu ) + ( udd ), R ⊺)) 

We now choose permutons R to maximize p(φε → φ, R ) and p(φL → φ, R ); we do not choose R for φR

as it yields a worse approximation than that for φL.First consider φL. As in the previous example, Theorem 12.1 implies that p(φL → φ, R ) > 1/12 for some strong IDU permuton, since in this case we have the following vectors v(φ, τ ):

(2 , 2, −2) and (2 , 0, 0) = (1 , 1, 1) + (1 , −1, −1) 

and both vectors have strictly positive inner products with y = (1 , 0, 0) .Let R = xI yD where x and y are nonnegative and add up to 1. We get 

d(( uuu ), R ⊺) = x4 + x3yd(( uud ), R ⊺) = x3y + x2y2

d(( udd ), R ⊺) = x2y2 + xy 3

p(φL → φ, R ) = min(2( x3y + x2y2), (x4 + x3y) + ( x2y2 + xy 3)) .

Maximizing this expression over all choices of x, y ≥ 0 with x + y = 1 , we get that the maximum is 8/27 

when x = 2 /3 and y = 1 /3.Now consider φε. It is easy to see that Theorem 12.1 again guarantees that p(φε → φ, R ) is nontrivial for some R, but we omit the straightforward computation. Let R = xI yI zI where x + y + z = 1 and all of them are nonnegative. We have, 

d(( uuu ), R ⊺) = x4 + x3y + x3z + x2y2 + x2yz 

+ x2z2 + xy 3 + xy 2z + xyz 2 + xz 3 + y4 + y3z + y2z2 + yz 3 + z4

d(( uud ), R ⊺) = x3y + x3z + x2yz + xy 2z + y3zd(( udu ), R ⊺) = x2y2 + x2yz + x2z2 + xyz 2 + y2z2

d(( udd ), R ⊺) = x2yz. 

We plug these expressions into the formula for p(φε → φ, R ) and solve for the optimal choice of (x, y, z )

numerically (as it appears there is no closed-form formula for them): 

(x, y, z ) ≈ (0 .41292217261909 , 0.19926838465167 , 0.38780944272924) ,

and p(φε → φ, R ) ≥ 0.1278735827 .

Corollary 14.2. There are polynomial-time approximation algorithms for satisfiable and nearly satisfiable instances of CSP( φ) for the predicate φ(x1, x 2, x 3, x 4) = ( x1 < x 2 < x 3 < x 4) ∨ (x1 < x 4 < x 3 < x 2).Given a satisfiable instance, the first algorithm satisfies at least a fraction α = 8 /27 = 0 .2962 ; given a 

(1 −ε)-satisfiable instance the second algorithm finds a solution satisfying at least a β −O(ε log n log log n)

fraction of the constraints, where β = 0 .1278735827 . In contrast, the trivial approximation algorithm gives a 1/12 = 0 .083 approximation. The first approximation algorithm beats the trivial approximation by a factor 3 5/9 = 3 .5.

54 15 Proofs of the main flag algebra results for strong IDU transformations 

15.1 Multiplication of flags for T -permutons 

We now give an alternative (but equivalent) definition of multiplication of standard permutation flags that is arguably more constructive than Definition 13.2. Although simple, we have not seen this formulation in the literature before. 

Definition 15.1. Consider two flags (π1, J 1) and (π2, J 2) of type τ . Assume that π1 ∈ Sn1 and π2 ∈ Sn2 .We say that a pair (X, Y ) is a y-shuffle of (π1, J 1) and (π2, J 2) if: • X is a sequence of distinct elements from [n1 + n2 − k] of length n1;• Y is a sequence of distinct elements from [n1 + n2 − k] of length n2;• X is order-isomorphic to π1, and Y is order-isomorphic to π2;• X restricted to indices in J1 is equal to Y restricted to indices in J2 (as sequences); • Xi̸ = Yj unless i ∈ J1 and j ∈ J2.

Example 15.2. Consider two flags (1 3 2 5 4 ) and (1 2 3 ) in F(1 2 ). They have two y-shuffles: 

> (

(1 4 3 6 5 ), (2 3 5 )) and ((2 4 3 6 5 ), (1 3 5 )).

Definition 15.3. Consider a pair of sequences (X, Y ). Assume that all elements in X are distinct and all elements in Y are distinct. Further, assume that the common elements of X and Y appear in the same order. Let J1 be the indices of the common elements in X, and let J2 be the indices of the common elements in Y .Consider a sequence Z formed from the elements of X and Y , in which the common elements – those with indices in J1 in X and in J2 in Y – appear only once, while the relative orders of elements from both X and Y are preserved. Let J denote the set of indices of the common elements in Z. We call (Z, J )

an x-shuffle of (X, Y ).If (X, Y ) is a y-shuffle, then the sequence Z defined in this way is a permutation, and (Z, J ) is a flag. 

Example 15.4. Consider a y-shuffle from Example 15.2, ((2 4 3 6 5 ), (1 3 5 )). It has the following x-shuffles: (1 2 4 3 6 5 ), (2 1 4 3 6 5 ), and (2 4 1 3 6 5 ).

Definition 15.5. Let (π1, J 1) and (π2, J 2) be two flags of type τ . Define their simple product as 

(π1, J 1) ⋆ (π2, J 2) = ∑ 

> (X,Y )
> ∑
> (Z,J )

(Z, J ),

where the first summation is over all y-shuffles (X, Y ) of (π1, J 1) and (π2, J 2), and the second summation is over all x-shuffles (Z, J ) of (X, Y ).

Observation 15.6. For two flags (π1, J 1) and (π2, J 2) of type τ ∈ Sk, with π1 ∈ Sn1 and π2 ∈ Sn2 , we have 

(π1, J 1) · (π2, J 2) = 1 

> (n1+n2−2kn1−k
> )

(π1, J 1) ⋆ (π2, J 2).

55 Claim 15.7. Consider two flags (π1, J 1), (π2, J 2) ∈ F τ . Let (X, Y ) and (X′, Y ′) be y-shuffles of these flags. Then ∑

> Z

(Z, J ) ≡ ∑

> Z′

(Z′, J ) (mod RN τ ),

where the first summation is over all x-shuffles (Z, J ) of (X, J 1) and (Y, J 2), and the second summation is over all x-shuffles (Z′, J ) of (X′, J 1) and (Y ′, J 2).Proof. Consider two flags f1 = ( π1, J 1) and f2 = ( π2, J 2). We define a swap operation on the set of 

y-shuffles of f1 and f2. Given a y-shuffle (X, Y ) and two elements Xi and Yj that differ by 1 and are both unlabeled, 

|Xi − Yj | = 1 and i / ∈ J1, j / ∈ J2,

we define another y-shuffle (X′, Y ′) by setting X′ 

> i

= Yj and Y ′ 

> j

= Xi, while keeping all other values unchanged; that is, X′ 

> t

= Xt for t̸ = i and Y ′ 

> t

= Yt for t̸ = j.Note that every y-shuffle of f1 and f2 can be transformed into any other y-shuffle of f1 and f2 by a sequence of swaps as defined above (essentially by applying a bubble-sort procedure). Therefore, it suffices to prove the statement for (X, Y ) and (X′, Y ′) obtained from (X, Y ) by such a swap: X′ 

> i

= Yj and Y ′ 

> j

= Xi. We construct a matching between x-shuffles of (X, Y ) and of (X′, Y ′) so that matched x-shuffles are equivalent modulo RN τ . In fact, for every x-shuffle (Z, J ) of (X, Y ) and every 

x-shuffle (Z′, J ) of (X′, Y ′), we have 

part( Z, J ) = part( Z′, J ) = part( π1, J 1) + part( π2, J 2).

Thus, it suffices to ensure that the up–down signatures of matched x-shuffles (Z, J ) and (Z′, J ) are equal. First, we match x-shuffles (Z, J ) in which the elements Xi and Yj do not appear next to each other (for the specific i and j as above) with x-shuffles (Z′, J ) in which the elements X′ 

> i

and Y ′ 

> j

also do not appear next to each other. The matching is straightforward – we consider x-shuffles (Z, J ) and (Z′, J ) formed using the same interleaving of X with Y and of X′ with Y ′; that is, Zs comes from X if and only if Z′

> s

comes from X′, and Zs comes from Y if and only if Z′ 

> s

comes from Y ′. We now show that Z and Z′ have equal up–down signatures. Consider two adjacent elements Zs and Zs+1 . If neither Zs nor Zs+1 equals 

Xi or Yj , then Zs = Z′ 

> s

and Zs+1 = Z′

> s+1

, and accordingly Z and Z′ have the same letter at position s in their up–down signatures. Now consider the case where one of Zs or Zs+1 equals Xi or Yj (note that it is impossible that one equals Xi and the other Yj , as we have assumed that Xi and Yj are not adjacent in Z). Let Zt be an element adjacent to Xi in Z. Then Xi > Z t if and only if X′ 

> i

> Z t, since |Xi − X′

> i

| = 1 

and thus Zt = Z′ 

> t

cannot lie between Xi and X′

> i

. The same reasoning applies to Yj and Y ′ 

> j

. We conclude that Z and Z′ have the same up–down signature. Now consider the case where Xi and Yj appear next to each other in Z. We match each x-shuffle of 

(X, Y ) in which Xi is immediately followed by Yj with the x-shuffle of (X′, Y ′) in which Y ′ 

> j

is immediately followed by X′

> i

, with all other elements occupying the same positions. These two shuffles are identical and thus have the same up–down signatures. Similarly, we match each x-shuffle of (X, Y ) in which Yj is immediately followed by Xi with the x-shuffle of (X′, Y ′) in which X′ 

> i

is immediately followed by Y ′ 

> j

,again with all other elements in the same positions. Again, these two x-shuffles are identical and thus have the same up–down signatures. We will also need to apply this claim in cases where (X, Y ) and (X′, Y ′) are not necessarily y-shuffles. Assume that in both pairs the set of common elements is the same set J, and that the patterns of X and X′

are equal, as are the patterns of Y and Y ′. By removing all gaps in X ∪ Y and in X′ ∪ Y ′ (that is, replacing each Xi and Yj with its rank in X ∪ Y , and each X′ 

> i

and Y ′ 

> j

with its rank in X′ ∪ Y ′), we reduce the general case of arbitrary (X, Y ) and (X′, Y ′) to the case of y-shuffles. This leads to the following corollary. 56 Corollary 15.8. Consider two pairs of sequences (X, Y ) and (X′, Y ′) as in Definition 15.3. Assume that the patterns of X and X′ are equal, the patterns of Y and Y ′ are equal, and the set of common elements in both pairs is the same J. Then the multisets of up–down signatures of all x-shuffles of (X, Y ) and of 

(X′, Y ′) are identical, including multiplicities. 

Theorem 15.9. For any two flags (π1, J 1), (π2, J 2) ∈ F τ and any y-shuffle (X, Y ) of (π1, J 1) and (π2, J 2),we have 

(π1, J 1) · (π2, J 2) ≡ c · ∑

> (Z,J )

(Z, J ) (mod RN τ )

and 

J(π1, J 1) · (π2, J 2)K =

uvc · ∑

> (Z,J )

(Z, J )

}~ ,

where 

c = M (part( π1, J 1)) M (part( π2, J 2)) 

M (part( π1, J 1) + part( π2, J 2)) ,

and the summation is taken over all x-shuffles (Z, J ) of (X, J 1) and (Y, J 2).Proof. We use the alternative definition of flag multiplication (see Observation 15.6). As we showed, the 

x-shuffle of a y-shuffle of a pair of flags does not depend on the specific choice of the y-shuffle modulo 

RN τ . Therefore, we may use the given shuffle (X, Y ). It remains to count the number of y-shuffles. Inside each block i (here we refer to the blocks from Definition 13.6), we can choose positions for elements from 

X and for elements from Y in (part( π1, J 1)i + part( π2, J 2)i

part( π1, J 1)i

> )

ways. The total number of y-shuffles is the product of these binomial coefficients over all blocks i:

> k+1 ∏
> i=1
> (

part( π1, J 1)i + part( π2, J 2)i

part( π1, J 1)i

> )

.

After simplification, we get the desired value of c.

15.2 Proof of Theorem 13.7 

Let us now define another swap operation that we will use in the proof of Theorem 13.7. 

Definition 15.10. Consider a flag (π, J ) ∈ F τ . Choose non-adjacent i1, i 2 /∈ J, and swap values at positions i1 and i2: π′(i1) = π(i2), π′(i2) = π(i1), and π′(i) = π(i) for all i / ∈ { i1, i 2}. We refer to this swap as an (i1, i 2)-swap . We say that a swap (π, J ) → (π′, J ) is valid if ud-sign( π) = ud-sign( π′).Note that for any swap (π, J ) → (π′, J ), we have part( π, J ) = part( π′, J ), and for every valid 

swap, ud-sign( π) = ud-sign( π′).In other words, valid swaps preserve both the up–down signature and the partition vector. Before proceeding with the proof, we need the following lemma. 

Lemma 15.11. Assume that (π1, J )−(π2, J ) ∈ N τ (that is, ud-sign( π1) = ud-sign( π2) and part( π1, J ) = part( π2, J )). Then π2 can be obtained from π1 by a sequence of valid swaps. 

57 Proof. We start with π = π1 and perform at most n − 1 stages to obtain π2. Each stage consists of a sequence of valid swaps. We ensure that after stage i, π and π2 agree on the positions in π−12 ([ i]) . As we only apply valid swaps, we will always have ud-sign( π) = ud-sign( π1) = ud-sign( π2) and part( π, J ) = part( π1, J ) = part( π2, J ).Assume that we have completed i−1 stages and that π and π2 agree on the positions in F = π−12 ([ i−1]) .Consider stage i. Let j = π−12 (i). Our goal is to ensure that after this stage, π and π2 still agree on F and that π(j) = π2(j) = i.If j ∈ J, then π(j) = π1(j) = π2(j), since π|J = π2|J (both are determined by their partition vectors and τ ). Thus, no action is required in this stage. Similarly, if π(j) = i = π2(j), then no action is required. Now assume that j / ∈ J and π(j)̸ = i. We iteratively find a valid (j, j ′)-swap with π(j′) < π (j) and 

j′ /∈ F , thereby decreasing the value of π(j). We finish this stage when no valid swaps of this form remain. Since we never choose j′ ∈ F , we do not change the values of π on F , and thus π and π2 still agree on F ,as required. It remains to show that π(j) = i = π2(j). Assume to the contrary that π(j) > i , but no swaps of the type described above are available. Let C = π−1({i, . . . , π (j) − 1}); note that |C| = π(j) − i > 0. For every j′ ∈ C, the pair (j, j ′) is not a valid swap (otherwise, we would have performed it and decreased π(j)). There are four possible reasons for this. In each case below, we assume that none of the previous cases apply. • j′ ∈ J.• j′ is adjacent to j. We show that this is not possible. In this case, π(j) > π (j′). Since π and π2 have the same up–down signature, we must have π2(j) > π 2(j′). However, π2(j) = i, hence π2(j′) < i ,and thus j′ ∈ F . Since π and π2 agree on F , we have π(j′) = π2(j′) < i , which contradicts the assumption that j′ ∈ C.• Either j′ − 1 or j′ + 1 blocks assigning π(j′) the value π(j), as doing so would alter the up–down signature. Since the assignment π(j′) ← π(j) is blocked, there exists j′′ ∈ { j′ − 1, j ′ + 1 } such that 

π(j′′ ) lies between π(j′) and π(j). To summarize, in this case there exists j′′ ∈ C adjacent to j′ with 

π(j′′ ) > π (j′).• The assignment π(j) ← π(j′) is blocked by one of the neighbors j′′ of j, as this assignment would change the up–down signature. We show that this is not possible. In this case, π(j′) < π (j′′ ) < π (j).Since π and π2 have the same up–down signature, we conclude that π2(j′′ ) < π 2(j) = i. Therefore, 

j′′ ∈ F . Because π and π2 agree on F , we have π(j′′ ) = π2(j′′ ) < i , which contradicts π(j′′ ) >π(j′) ≥ i.We have shown that there are two possibilities: either j′ ∈ J, or there exists j′′ ∈ C adjacent to j′ with 

π(j′′ ) > π (j′). Define a directed acyclic graph on C by adding an edge from j′ to an adjacent j′′ whenever 

π(j′′ ) > π (j′). Our case analysis implies that all sinks in this graph are in J.For a given j′, consider a path j1 → j2 → · · · → jt in this graph that starts at j1 = j′ and terminates at a sink jt ∈ J. We have π(j′) = π(j1) < π (j2) < · · · < π (jt) < π (j). Since π and π2 have the same up–down signatures, it follows that π2(j′) = π2(j1) < π 2(j2) < · · · < π 2(jt). Moreover, since jt ∈ J ∩ C,we have 

π2(j′) < π 2(jt) = π(jt) < π (j).

Therefore, π2(j′) < π (j) for all j′ ∈ C. Further, if j′ ∈ C, then j′ /∈ F and j′̸ = j, thus π2(j′) > i . We conclude that for every j′ ∈ C, π2(j′) ∈ { i + 1 , . . . , π (j) − 1}. But this is impossible, because 

|C| = π(j) − i > |{ i + 1 , . . . , π (j) − 1}| .

We get a contradiction. This concludes the proof. 58 Xi1−1 Xi1 Xi1+1 Xi2−1 Xi2 Xi2+1 

R1 R1 R1R2 R3

Figure 10: The figure shows regions R1, R2, and R3.Now we are ready to prove Theorem 13.7 

Proof of Theorem 13.7. 1. Assume first that P = C, where C is the transpose of an up–down combination: 

C = ( x1I y1D x2I y2D . . . xN I yN D)⊺. (15) Let S = ( s1, . . . , s k), where the points are ordered by their x-coordinates. The projections of the points in S onto the y-axis partition the interval [0 , 1] into k + 1 segments of lengths z1, . . . , z k+1 . Let gi be xt

if the point si lies in the region of [0 , 1] 2 corresponding to the term xtI in C, and yt if si lies in the region corresponding to the term ytD.For (π, J ) ∈ F τ , we derive a formula for d(( π, J ), (C, S )) . Write J = {j1, . . . , j k} with j1 < · · · < j k.Applying Theorem 9.4 and Lemma 9.7 (and swapping the x- and y-axes), we obtain that for every (π, J ) ∈Fτ ,

d(( π, J ), (C, S )) = M (part( π, J )) 

> k+1 ∏
> i=1

zpart( π,J )i 

> i

· ∑

> f
> ∏
> i / ∈J

f (i), (16) where the sum is over all π-partition functions f with f (ji) = gi.Now consider two flags (π1, J ) and (π2, J ) equivalent modulo RN τ . They have the same signature and the same partition vector, and thus the expressions in (16) are identical for both flags. Therefore, their densities are the same in every tagged T -permuton (C, S ) with C as in (15). Since ID combinations are dense in the set of all strong IDU permutons, we conclude that the densities of (π1, J ) and (π2, J ) are equal in every tagged T -permuton (P, S ).2. This is immediate: if (π1, J ) − (π2, J ) ∈ N τ , then ud-sign( π1) = ud-sign( π2), thus π1 − π2 ∈ N ∅.3. To verify that RN τ is an ideal, we must show that for every (π, J ) and (π′, J ) in Aτ satisfying 

ud-sign( π) = ud-sign( π′) and part( π, J ) = part( π′, J ), and for every (ρ, J ′), we have 

(π, J ) · (ρ, J ′) ≡ (π′, J ) · (ρ, J ′) (mod RN τ ). (17) By Lemma 15.11, it is sufficient to consider the case where π′ is obtained from π by a valid swap (i1, i 2).Assume that i1 < i 2.We express the result of flag multiplication on both sides of (17) using Theorem 15.9. Choose a y-shuffle 

(X, Y ) for π and ρ. Then there exists a y-shuffle (X′, Y ) for π′ and ρ with the same sequence Y for the elements of ρ. Namely, X′ is obtained from X by swapping Xi1 and Xi2 .In every x-shuffle of (X, Y ), the set J∗ of positions of common elements is determined by J and J′

(namely, the element ranked i in J∗ is equal to the sum of the elements ranked i in J and J′ minus 1). To specify an x-shuffle, we must decide, for each position not occupied by a common element, whether it is occupied by some Xi or some Yi. The same applies to (X′, Y ). We proceed as follows. We first fix the positions of Xi1−1, Xi1+1 , Xi2−1, and Xi2+1 within Z (some of these points may be absent if i1 = 1 or 

i2 = |π|), and then make the choices independently for all positions in three regions R1, R2, and R3 defined below (see Figure 10): 59 1. The first region, R1, consists of three intervals: positions to the left of Xi1−1 (this interval is empty if 

i1 = 1 ), positions between Xi1+1 and Xi2−1, and positions to the right of Xi2+1 in Z (this interval is empty if i2 = |π|). 2. The second region, R2, consists of positions between Xi1−1 and Xi1+1 in Z.3. The third region, R3, consists of positions between Xi2−1 and Xi2+1 in Z.Importantly, R2 and R3 do not overlap, since i2 − i1 > 1. Since the positions of Xi1±1 and Xi2±1 are fixed, the sets of elements Xi and Yj assigned to each interval of R1 and to each of the regions R2 and R3

are determined. However, the interleaving of elements of X and Y within each interval and region is not yet fixed. We first decide which positions in R1 are occupied by elements of X and which by elements of Y . All elements of J∗ within R1 in Z (resp. Z′) are occupied by the common elements of X and Y (resp. X′

and Y ). Aside from J∗, we choose the same interleaving of elements of X and Y within R1 in Z and of elements of X′ and Y within R1 in Z′. This completely determines the x-shuffles Z and Z′ within R1,and therefore their up–down signatures within R1. Since X and X′ coincide in R1, and Xi1±1 = X′

> i1±1

and Xi2±1 = X′ 

> i2±1

(with the signs chosen consistently; some of these points may be absent if i1 = 1 or 

i2 = |π|), the up–down signatures within R1 are identical. It remains to prove that the multiset of possible up–down signatures for the region R2 is the same for 

(X, Y ) and (X′, Y ), and that an analogous statement holds for R3.The proofs for R2 and R3 are identical, so we provide only the argument for R2. We consider auxiliary sequences A and B:• A consists of A1 = Xi1−1, A2 = Xi1 , and A3 = Xi1+1 ; element Xi1−1 is absent if i1 = 1 .• B consists of Xi1−1 (absent if i1 = 1 ), followed by all elements of Y assigned to R2, and finally 

Xi1+1 . We do not include Xi1−1 or Xi1+1 twice if they also appear in Y .Note that the elements Xi1−1 (if it exists) and Xi1+1 are the only common elements between sequences A

and B.All possible signatures for R2 are precisely the signatures of all possible x-shuffles of A and B. We similarly define A′ and B′ = B for X′ and Y . Since X and X′ have the same up–down signature, Xi1−1 =

X′

> i1−1

, and Xi1+1 = X′

> i1+1

, the patterns defined by A and A′ are equal (the relative order of A1 = A′ 

> 1

and 

A3 = A′ 

> 3

is the same in both A and A′, and the relative order of A3 (resp. A′

> 3

) with the remaining elements of A (resp. A′) is determined by the up–down signature). By Corollary 15.8, the signatures of x-shuffles of 

(A, B ) and of (A′, B ) are equal as multisets. This concludes the proof. 

# Acknowledgements 

This project was supported by NSF awards CCF-1955173 and ECCS-2216899. We are grateful to Google for providing access to a c4-highcpu-8 Google Cloud instance, which we used to compute approximation factors for single-predicate CSPs of arity 4. We thank the organizers and participants of Dagstuhl Seminar 25211, The Constraint Satisfaction Problem: Complexity and Approximability , for providing a stimulating environment in which this project began. In his lectures at that seminar, Amey Bhangale raised the question of the approximability of completely satisfiable ordering CSPs and rekindled our interest in the topic. We also thank the anonymous referees for their helpful comments. 60 References 

[1] A. Agarwal, M. Charikar, K. Makarychev, and Y. Makarychev. O(√log n) approximation algorithms for Min UnCut, Min 2CNF Deletion, and directed cut problems. In Proceedings of the Symposium on Theory of Computing , pages 573–581, 2005. [2] P. Austrin and E. Mossel. Approximation resistant predicates from pairwise independence. Computa-tional Complexity , 18(2):249–271, 2009. [3] A. Avidor, I. Berkovitch, and U. Zwick. Improved approximation algorithms for Max NAE-SAT and Max SAT. In Proceedings of the International Workshop on Approximation and Online Algorithms ,pages 27–40. Springer, 2005. [4] J. Balogh, P. Hu, B. Lidick` y, O. Pikhurko, B. Udvari, and J. Volec. Minimum number of monotone subsequences of length 4 in permutations. Combinatorics, Probability and Computing , 24(4):658–679, 2015. [5] F. Bassino, M. Bouvel, V. Féray, L. Gerin, M. Maazoun, and A. Pierrot. Universal limits of substitution-closed permutation classes. Journal of the European Mathematical Society , 22(11):3565–3639, 2020. [6] A. Bhangale and S. Khot. Optimal inapproximability of satisfiable k-LIN over non-abelian groups. In 

Proceedings of the Symposium on Theory of Computing , pages 1615–1628, 2021. [7] A. Bhangale, S. Khot, and D. Minzer. On approximability of satisfiable k-CSPs: V. In Proceedings of the Symposium on Theory of Computing , pages 62–71, 2025. [8] M. Bodirsky and J. Kára. The complexity of temporal constraint satisfaction problems. Journal of the ACM (JACM) , 57(2):1–41, 2010. [9] M. Bodirsky and J. Kára. A fast algorithm and datalog inexpressibility for temporal reasoning. ACM Transactions on Computational Logic (TOCL) , 11(3):1–21, 2010. [10] J. Brakensiek, N. Huang, A. Potechin, and U. Zwick. Separating Max 2-AND, Max DI-CUT and Max CUT. In Proceedings of the Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science , pages 234–252, 2023. [11] J. Brakensiek, N. Huang, and U. Zwick. Tight approximability of Max 2-SAT and relatives, under UGC. In Proceedings of the Symposium on Discrete Algorithms , pages 1328–1344, 2024. [12] A. A. Bulatov. A dichotomy theorem for nonuniform CSPs. In Proceedings of the Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science , pages 319–330, 2017. [13] S. O. Chan. Approximation resistance from pairwise-independent subgroups. Journal of the ACM (JACM) , 63(3):1–32, 2016. [14] M. Charikar, K. Makarychev, and Y. Makarychev. Near-optimal algorithms for unique games. In 

Proceedings of the Symposium on Theory of Computing , pages 205–214, 2006. [15] M. Charikar, K. Makarychev, and Y. Makarychev. On the advantage over random for maximum acyclic subgraph. In Proceedings of the Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science , pages 625–633, 2007. [16] M. Charikar, K. Makarychev, and Y. Makarychev. Near-optimal algorithms for maximum constraint satisfaction problems. ACM Transactions on Algorithms (TALG) , 5(3):1–14, 2009. 61 [17] E. Chlamtac, K. Makarychev, and Y. Makarychev. How to play unique games using embeddings. In 

Proceedings of the Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science , pages 687–696, 2006. [18] B. Chor and M. Sudan. A geometric approach to betweenness. SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics ,11(4):511–523, 1998. [19] G. Crudele, P. Dukes, and J. A. Noel. Six permutation patterns force quasirandomness. Discrete Analysis , 2024. [20] G. Even, J. Naor, B. Schieber, and M. Sudan. Approximating minimum feedback sets and multicuts in directed graphs. Algorithmica , 20(2):151–174, 1998. [21] M. X. Goemans and D. P. Williamson. Improved approximation algorithms for maximum cut and satisfiability problems using semidefinite programming. Journal of the ACM (JACM) , 42(6):1115– 1145, 1995. [22] V. Guruswami, J. Håstad, R. Manokaran, P. Raghavendra, and M. Charikar. Beating the random order-ing is hard: Every ordering CSP is approximation resistant. SIAM Journal on Computing , 40(3):878– 914, 2011. [23] V. Guruswami and Y. Zhou. Approximating bounded occurrence ordering CSPs. In Proceedings of the International Workshop on Approximation Algorithms for Combinatorial Optimization , pages 158–169, 2012. [24] G. Gutin, L. Van Iersel, M. Mnich, and A. Yeo. Every ternary permutation constraint satisfaction problem parameterized above average has a kernel with a quadratic number of variables. Journal of Computer and System Sciences , 78(1):151–163, 2012. [25] C. Hoppen, Y. Kohayakawa, C. G. Moreira, B. Ráth, and R. M. Sampaio. Limits of permutation sequences. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B , 103(1):93–113, 2013. [26] O. Kallenberg. Symmetries on random arrays and set-indexed processes. Journal of Theoretical Probability , 5(4):727–765, 1992. [27] O. Kallenberg. Probabilistic symmetries and invariance principles . Springer, 2005. [28] S. Khot, M. Tulsiani, and P. Worah. A characterization of strong approximation resistance. In Pro-ceedings of the Symposium on Theory of Computing , pages 634–643, 2014. [29] M. Lewin, D. Livnat, and U. Zwick. Improved rounding techniques for the Max 2-SAT and Max DI-CUT problems. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Integer Programming and Combi-natorial Optimization , pages 67–82, 2002. [30] K. Makarychev. Local search is better than random assignment for bounded occurrence ordering k-CSPs. In Proceedings of the International Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science ,page 139, 2013. [31] K. Makarychev and Y. Makarychev. Approximation algorithm for non-Boolean Max k-CSP. In Pro-ceedings of the International Workshop on Approximation Algorithms for Combinatorial Optimization ,pages 254–265. Springer, 2012. [32] K. Makarychev and Y. Makarychev. Approximation algorithms for CSPs. In A. Krokhin and S. Zivny, editors, The Constraint Satisfaction Problem: Complexity and Approximability , volume 7 of Dagstuhl Follow-Ups , pages 287–325. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2017. 62 [33] K. Makarychev, Y. Makarychev, and Y. Zhou. Satisfiability of ordering CSPs above average is fixed-parameter tractable. In Proceedings of the Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science , pages 975–993, 2015. [34] Y. Makarychev. Simple linear time approximation algorithm for betweenness. Operations Research Letters , 40(6):450–452, 2012. [35] Y. Makarychev. Ordering constraint satisfaction problems (arity 4). https://github.com/ ymakarychev/ordering-csp , 2026. GitHub repository. [36] I. Niven. A combinatorial problem of finite sequences. Nieuw Arch. Wisk , 16(3):116–123, 1968. [37] F. Petrov. Correcting continuous hypergraphs. Algebra i Analiz , 28(6):84–90, 2016. English transl.: 

St. Petersburg Math. J. , 28(6):783–787, 2017. An alternative preprint version is available at https: //arxiv.org/abs/1309.3795 .[38] S. Poirier. Cycle type and descent set in wreath products. Discrete Mathematics , 180(1):315–343, 1998. Proceedings of the 7th Conference on Formal Power Series and Algebraic Combinatorics. [39] P. Raghavendra. Optimal algorithms and inapproximability results for every CSP? In Proceedings of the Symposium on Theory of Computing , pages 245–254, 2008. [40] F. Ramsey. On a problem of formal logic. Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society , 30:264– 285, 1930. [41] A. A. Razborov. Flag algebras. The Journal of Symbolic Logic , 72(4):1239–1282, 2007. [42] T. J. Schaefer. The complexity of satisfiability problems. In Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing , pages 216–226, 1978. [43] P. D. Seymour. Packing directed circuits fractionally. Combinatorica , 15(2):281–288, 1995. [44] J. R. Stembridge. Enriched p-partitions. Transactions of the American Mathematical Society ,349(2):763–788, 1997. [45] L. Trevisan. Approximating satisfiable satisfiability problems. Algorithmica , 28(1):145–172, 2000. [46] D. Zhuk. A proof of the csp dichotomy conjecture. Journal of the ACM (JACM) , 67(5):1–78, 2020. [47] U. Zwick. Finding almost-satisfying assignments. In Proceedings of the Symposium on Theory of Computing , pages 551–560, 1998. 

# A Shuffle-closed predicates 

In this section, we show that every shuffle-closed predicate is a Not-First predicate (see Definition 3.1). We now state the definition of a shuffle-closed predicate for ordering CSPs. 

Definition A.1. An ordering predicate φ of arity k is shuffle-closed if for every two permutations α, β ∈

Sat( φ) and every t ∈ [k − 1] , the permutation σ defined as follows also belongs to Sat( φ):• σ(i) = α(i) if α(i) ∈ [t];• σ(i) > t if α(i) /∈ [t];• the relative order of values σ(i) for i / ∈ α−1([ t]) is the same as in β.63 Although we do not explicitly require that the property above holds for t = 0 and t = k, it trivially does, since for t = 0 we get σ = β, and for t = k we get σ = α.

Theorem A.2. Every shuffle-closed ordering predicate is a Not-First predicate. Proof. Consider the relaxation φL of φ (see Section 3.2). We will show that φ = φL and thus φ is a Not-First predicate, as required. Fix a permutation π ∈ Sat( φL). We will show that π ∈ Sat( φ). To this end, we prove by induction on 

i that there exists a permutation πi ∈ Sat( φ) that agrees with π on π−1([ i]) . The statement trivially holds for i = 0 .Assume it holds for some i < k ; we prove it for i + 1 . Let j = π−1(i + 1) . Consider the constraint 

ψ = NFirst k−i(xj , x a1 , . . . , x ak−i−1 ), where a1, . . . , a k−i−1 are the elements of [k] \ π−1([ i + 1]) . Note that π does not satisfy this constraint, since π(j) = i + 1 is smaller than the elements of {π(ar)}k−i−1 

> r=1

=[k] \ [i + 1] . However, since π ∈ Sat( φL), π satisfies all Not-First constraints implied by φ. We conclude that the constraint ψ is not implied by φ or, in other words, not a relaxation of φ.Therefore, there exists a permutation β ∈ Sat( φ) that does not satisfy ψ. We apply the shuffle operation to α = πi and β with t = i. Denote the obtained permutation by πi+1 . Since πi, β ∈ Sat( φ) and φ is shuffle-closed, πi+1 ∈ Sat( φ).By the definition of the shuffle operation, πi+1 agrees with πi, and thus with π, on π−1([ i]) . Since 

π(j), π (a1), . . . , π (ak−i−1) /∈ [i], by item 3 of Definition A.1, the relative orderings of 

πi+1 (j), π i+1 (a1), . . . , π i+1 (ak−i−1) and of β(j), β (a1), . . . , β (ak−i−1)

are the same. Note that β(j) is smaller than all β(ar), since β does not satisfy ψ. Thus, πi+1 (j) is also smaller than all πi+1 (ar). Now, there are k − i distinct values πi+1 (j), π i+1 (a1), . . . , π i+1 (ak−i−1) and all of them lie in [k] \ [i], since πi+1 (π−1 

> i

([ i])) = [ i]. Therefore, 

{πi+1 (j), π i+1 (a1), . . . , π i+1 (ak−i−1)} = [ k] \ [i].

Further, πi+1 (j) is the smallest in the set. We conclude that πi+1 (j) = i + 1 = π(j). Thus, πi+1 agrees with π on π−1([ i + 1]) , as required. We proved that πi ∈ Sat( φ) agrees with π on π−1([ i]) for every i. In particular, πk agrees with π

everywhere; that is, πk = π. We get π = πk ∈ Sat( φ). We showed that every π ∈ Sat( φL) is in Sat( φ)

and thus Sat( φ) ⊇ Sat( φL). Since φL is a relaxation of φ, Sat( φ) ⊆ Sat( φL). Thus, Sat( φ) = Sat( φL)

and φ = φL.64