Title: Investigation of Automated Design of Quantum Circuits for Imaginary Time Evolution Methods Using Deep Reinforcement Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.07951v1

Published Time: Fri, 10 Apr 2026 00:44:55 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
# Investigation of Automated Design of Quantum Circuits for Imaginary Time Evolution Methods Using Deep Reinforcement Learning 

Ryo Suzuki ∗ and Shohei Watabe †

Graduate School of Engineering and Science, Shibaura Institute of Technology, Toyosu 3-7-5, Tokyo 135-8548, Japan 

Efficient ground state search is fundamental to advancing combinatorial optimization problems and quantum chemistry. While the Variational Imaginary Time Evolution (VITE) method offers a useful alternative to Variational Quantum Eigensolver (VQE), and Quantum Approximate Op-timization Algorithm (QAOA), its implementation on Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum (NISQ) devices is severely limited by the gate counts and depth of manually designed ansatz. Here, we present an automated framework for VITE circuit design using Double Deep-Q Networks (DDQN). Our approach treats circuit construction as a multi-objective optimization problem, simultaneously minimizing energy expectation values and optimizing circuit complexity. By introducing adoptive thresholds, we demonstrate significant hardware overhead reductions. In Max-Cut problems, our agent autonomously discovered circuits with approximately 37% fewer gates and 43% less depth than standard hardware-efficient ansatz on average. For molecular hydrogen ( H2), the DDQN also achieved the Full-CI limit, with maintaining a significantly shallower circuit. These results suggest that deep reinforcement learning can be helpful to find non-intuitive, optimal circuit structures, providing a pathway toward efficient, hardware-aware quantum algorithm design. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum (NISQ) comput-ers [1] are fundamentally constrained by decoherence and limited gate fidelities. Consequently, the practical util-ity of NISQ algorithms depends on the ability to design shallow quantum circuits that minimize gate counts while maintaining computational accuracy. For applications such as combinatorial optimization problems and quan-tum chemical calculations, determining the optimal gate sequence and circuit topology is a non-trivial task that typically demands extensive domain expertise and man-ual heuristic tuning. As the performance of NISQ algo-rithms is highly sensitive to the underlying ansatz struc-ture, there is a critical need for automated, hardware-aware circuit design methodologies. Recently, reinforce-ment learning (RL) has emerged as a promising candidate for self-learning autonomous circuit design [2–5]. Earlier studies have explored various RL architectures for circuit optimization. Mateusz et al. [2] employed a Double Deep-Q Network (DDQN) to design ansatz for the Variational Quantum Eigensolver (VQE) [6]. While their framework successfully derived the ground state of lithium hydride (LiH) with fewer gates than stan-dard Hardware-Efficient ansatz [7], the reward structure lacks an explicit incentive for reducing circuit size, pro-viding only a negative penalty for exceeding depth con-straints. Similarly, F¨ osel et al. [3] utilized the RL based on Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [8] to optimize pre-existing inefficient circuits. Although they achieved a 27% reduction in depth for 12-qubit systems, the op-timization efficiency remained highly dependent on the   

> ∗al20108@shibaura-it.ac.jp
> †watabe@shibaura-it.ac.jp

quality of the initial circuit, such as randomly gener-ated circuits or initial circuits from the Quantum Ap-proximate Optimization Algorithm (QAOA)[9]. Further-more, Kolle et al. [4] applied Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) for state preparation but observed a tendency toward structural redundancy as the target-state com-plexity increased. Despite these advancements, most RL-based automa-tion for the NISQ algorithms has focused on VQE and QAOA. The Variational Imaginary Time Evolution (VITE) method [10]—a powerful technique for ground-state exploration and generating probability distribu-tions for machine learning—remains relatively under-explored in the context of automated ansatz design. Moreover, existing RL frameworks for VQE and QAOA lack an explicit reward incentive for circuit-size reduc-tion. This absence not only makes it difficult to navigate the trade-off between energy and compactness but also fails to provide any guarantee that the resulting circuit is structurally optimal, often leading to redundant, exces-sively deep architectures that are impractical for noisy hardware. We here study an automated design framework of quantum circuits for the VITE method using a DDQN architecture that simultaneously optimizes the circuit to reach the ground state while ensuring its structural com-plexity is minimized. We evaluate the performance of our method on the Max-Cut problem and molecular ground-state simulations. In both cases, we observed a tendency for the expectation value of the Hamiltonian and circuit depths to decrease. However, in quantum chemistry cal-culations, the performance is sensitive to the reward and threshold, and the energy expectation value mainly con-verges to the Hartree-Fock approximation value rather than the exact solution (Full-CI) for a suboptimal thresh-old. To resolve this issue, we implemented an adoptive 

> arXiv:2604.07951v1 [quant-ph] 9 Apr 2026

2thresholding mechanism for the expectation value of the Hamiltonian. By using this mechanism, we significantly improved the success rate of discovering shallow circuits capable of reaching the Full-CI value. Furthermore, by analyzing various circuits generated by the DDQN, we extracted skelton structures from the designed circuits, demonstrating the potential for further reduction in the number of gates. These findings not only demonstrate the efficacy of RL in non-unitary algorithm design but also provide a potential foundation for establishing sys-tematic guidelines for future, hardware-aware ansatz con-struction.  

> II. VARIATIONAL IMAGINARY TIME EVOLUTION (VITE) METHOD

The imaginary time evolution (ITE) method [10, 11] is a powerful NISQ-compatible algorithm designed for ground-state preparation. Unlike real-time evolution, where the time evolution of quantum systems is described by the Schr¨ odinger equation: 

i ∂ |ψ(t)⟩

∂t = H |ψ(t)⟩ , (1) the ITE evolves the system according to the Schr¨ odinger equation transformed via a Wick rotation [12], where the real time t is replaced by the imaginary time τ = it , given by 

∂ |ψ(τ )⟩

∂τ = −(H − Eτ ) |ψ(τ )⟩ . (2) Here, Eτ = ⟨ψ(τ )|H|ψ(τ )⟩ represents the energy expec-tation value at the imaginary-time τ to conserve the norm of the quantum state vector. The quantum state |ψ(τ )⟩

satisfying Eq. (2) is given by 

|ψ(τ )⟩ = e−Hτ |ψ(0) ⟩

p⟨ψ(0) |e−2Hτ |ψ(0) ⟩ , (3) where an initial state with nonzero overlap with the ground state converges to the ground state of the Hamil-tonian through a long imaginary time evolution ( τ → ∞ ). Since the ITE is a non-unitary process, it cannot be directly implemented on a quantum gate-based com-puter. To overcome this, the McLachlan’s variational principle [13, 14] is employed in VITE to approximate the evolution using a parameterized trial state |ϕ(θ(τ )) ⟩,where θ(τ ) = ( θ1(τ ), θ 2(τ ), . . . , θ N (τ )) T represents a set of time-dependent rotation angles in the ansatz. The McLachlan’s principle minimizes the distance between the exact ITE and the constrained evolution within the parameterized manifold: 

δ

 ∂∂τ + H − Eτ



|ϕ(τ )⟩ = 0 . (4) This optimization provides linear equations governing the time evolution of the parameters θ:

X

> j

Aij ˙θj = Ci, (5) where ˙θj denotes the time derivative of θj . The coeffi-cients Aij and Ci are respectively given by 

Aij = Re 

 ∂ ⟨ϕ|

∂θ i

∂ |ϕ⟩

∂θ j



, (6) 

Ci = Re − X

> α

λα

∂ ⟨ϕ|

∂θ i

Pα |ϕ⟩

!

. (7) Here, Pα and λα represent the Pauli operators and their corresponding coefficients in the system Hamilto-nian H = P 

> α

λαPα. By numerically solving Eq. (5) on a classical computer, the parameters θ are updated iteratively, driving the trial state toward the ground state. This framework enables the approximation of non-unitary ITE through a sequence of unitary operations via continuous parameter updates.  

> III. REINFORCEMENT LEARNING

Reinforcement learning (RL) [15] is a computational approach where an autonomous agent learns to make se-quences of decisions to maximize a cumulative reward within a given environment. The learning process relies on trial-and-error interactions, enabling the agent to op-timize its strategy (policy) without pre-existing labeled datasets. In our framework, each interaction is repre-sented by a transition tuple consisting of four fundamen-tal elements (see also Fig. 1): 

• State St: The current configuration of the envi-ronment. In this study, St represents the current structure of the quantum circuit. 

• Action At: The operation performed by the agent. We define the action space as the ad-dition of one quantum gate from a gate set 

{Rx, R y , R z , I, CNOT }.

• Reward Rt: A scalar feedback signal evaluating the performance. Here, Rt is determined by both the energy expectation value and the circuit com-plexity. 

• Next State St+1 : The state resulting from taking action At in state St, corresponding to the updated circuit structure. A single interaction cycle, moving from St to St+1 and receiving Rt, is defined as one step . An episode encom-passes the entire sequence from the initial circuit to the final design. The agent’s ultimate objective is to dis-cover an optimal sequence of actions that yields a high-precision, low-depth quantum circuit. 3 

> FIG. 1. Schematics of the framework and the process of ex-perience replay when applied to quantum circuit design.
> A. ε-greedy

Balancing exploration and exploitation is crucial in re-inforcement learning. Exploration enables the agent to traverse diverse circuit configurations, whereas exploita-tion leverages its experience to converge toward an op-timal policy. To manage this trade-off, we employ an 

ε-greedy method [16], where the agent selects a random action with probability ε and the action that maximizes the Q-value with probability 1 − ε.Typically, ε is initialized to a high value to prioritize exploration and is decayed toward a lower bound as learn-ing progresses. A standard approach for decaying the exploration probability is given by ε = Γ t, where Γ is a decay rate (0 < Γ < 1), and t represents the cumula-tive number of steps across the entire training process. However, in the current task, such a global decay tends to reduce the exploration rate prematurely. This often results in highly constrained exploration of novel circuit configurations during the later stages of the learning pro-cess. To maintain a consistent exploration-exploitation trade-off throughout the training progress regardless of the cumulative number of steps, we employ a modified decay function: 

ε = Γ (ν−1)+( tν −1) , (8) which can show a gradual transition from broad explo-ration to stable exploitation as the episode progresses. Here, ν denotes the episode index and tν represents the step count within the ν-th episode. By incorporating the episode index ν and the step count tν within each episode—rather than the cumulative steps across the en-tire training process—the decay function ensures that the exploration rate scales with the overall learning progress while preserving sufficient capacity for trial-and-error.  

> B. Double Deep-Q Network (DDQN)

To facilitate efficient and stable circuit design, we em-ploy the Double Deep-Q Network (DDQN) algorithm [17], a variant of deep reinforcement learning that en-hances the quality of action selection (exploitation). In this framework, the agent estimates the action-value function, or Q-value Q(St, A t), which represents the ex-pected cumulative reward obtained by taking action At

in state St and following the optimal policy thereafter. A critical challenge in standard Deep-Q Networks (DQN) is the tendency to incorrectly estimate Q-values. DDQN mitigates this incorrect estimation by using two separate neural networks: an online network of Qθ for the action selection and a target network of Qθ′ for Q-value evalu-ation. The update rule for the Q-value is given by 

Qθ (St, A t) ← Qθ (St, A t) + α Qtarg  

> t

− Qθ (St, A t) , (9) where Qtarg  

> t

is defined as 

Qtarg  

> t

= Rt + γQ θ′



St+1 , arg max 

> a′

Qθ (St+1 , a ′)



. (10) Here, α is the learning rate and γ is the discount fac-tor. The target network parameters θ′ are synchronized with the online network parameters θ at regular inter-vals (every fixed number of episodes). We selectively use two neural networks for Qθ to select the best action and 

Qθ′ to evaluate its value, and minimize the difference between the target value Qtarg  

> t

and the current Q-value 

Qθ (St, A t), thereby updating the weights and biases of the neural network Qθ . This allows DDQN to mitigate noise-induced estimation errors, resulting in more stable and accurate Q-value predictions. To further stabilize the training process, we utilize 

experience replay (see Fig. 1). This mechanism breaks the temporal correlation between consecutive samples by storing transition tuples ( St, A t, R t, S t+1 ) in a replay buffer. During the learning phase, the agent randomly samples mini-batches of n-experiences from the buffer to update the weights and biases of Qθ . As illustrated in Fig. 1, this stochastic sampling ensures that the neural network learns from a diverse set of past experiences, preventing it from overfitting to recent trajectories. In our implementation, experience replay is performed at specific step intervals and at the end of each episode, en-suring policy refinement throughout the design process.   

> IV. METHOD A. Quantum Circuit Design Workflow

In this study, we automate the construction of quan-tum circuits for the VITE. The design process follows a sequential optimization loop, as illustrated in Fig. 2. The specific steps are as follows: 1. Initialization : An initial circuit S0 is prepared by applying Hadamard gates ( H) to all qubits to create a uniform superposition state. 4

> FIG. 2. Schematics of Quantum Circuit Design Workflow.

2. Action Selection : The agent selects an action At

(adding a gate) to update the current circuit design 

St to St+1 .3. Simulation : The VITE is performed using the up-dated circuit St+1 .4. Reward Calculation : A scalar reward Rt is com-puted based on the energy expectation value and the resulting circuit complexity. 5. Termination Check : The process terminates if predefined conditions are satisfied; otherwise, the agent returns to the step (2). The design process terminates when one of the follow-ing criteria is satisfied: (i) the energy expectation value falls below a predefined threshold Ethreshold (defined as a success ), or (ii) the circuit depth or gate count reaches the predefined upper bound (defined as a failure ). The strategy determining the threshold Ethreshold will be dis-cussed in Sec. IV D 2 and Sec. VI B. To evaluate the efficiency of our framework, we em-ploy a 4-qubit system for our simulation, which is pri-marily driven by two factors. First, scaling the number of qubits is impractical at this proof-of-concept (PoC) stage because the coupling of RL with VITE simulations is computationally intensive, especially given the need for extensive tuning of both hyperparameters and parame-ters. Second, a 4-qubit system for the hydrogen molecule (H2) is the minimal configuration for meaningful quan-tum chemical simulations. We then employ a 4-qubit hardware-efficient SU(2) ansatz as a baseline [7]. The upper bounds on circuit depth and gate count are determined to maintain an efficient search space while ensuring sufficient expressivity. For the evaluation of the proposed framework, the Max-Cut problem serves as a benchmark for combinatorial optimization, and the H2

Hamiltonian is adopted for quantum chemistry applica-tions. For the H2 Hamiltonian, the preliminary simula-tions indicated that a repetition number of p = 1 in the hardware-efficient SU(2) ansatz is insufficient for ground state convergence, whereas p = 2 (corresponding to a    

> FIG. 3. Quantum circuit for 4-qubit hardware-efficient SU(2) ansatz (reps=2), referring to the structure following the H
> gates. The circuit depth is 11 and the gate count is 30; note that the initial Hgates are excluded from the count.

depth of 11 and 30 gates) is required (Fig. 3). Accord-ingly, the agent’s upper bounds are set at a depth of 10 and a gate count of 30, excluding the initial Hadamard gates. While the gate count bound matches the base-line, the depth bound is intentionally set to be stricter than the 11-layer hardware-efficient SU(2) ansatz. This configuration aims to discover circuit structures that out-perform the baseline by achieving higher efficiency with reduced depth for the H2 Hamiltonian. Note that since the initialization to add Hadamard gates in the step (1) is a standard procedure in our framework, these gates are excluded from the gate count and circuit depth metrics in this study. Furthermore, to enhance search efficiency and prune the search space, gates are added column-wise across qubits. For example, in a state St shown in Fig. 2, gates are added in the order of Rx, Ry , Rx, Rz , and CNOT-gates. We further impose two structural constraints: 

• Adjacency Constraint : Identical single-qubit gates (excluding identity gates) are prohibited from being placed consecutively on the same qubit, even if separated only by identity gates. 

• Connectivity Constraint : CNOT gates are re-stricted to nearest-neighbor qubits, with the con-trol bit at qi and the target bit at qi+1 , to adhere hardware efficiency and avoid costly SWAP over-head. 5

> FIG. 4. Schematics of the Max-Cut problem. A graph with 4 vertices and its maximum cut. All edge weights are set to 1.

Regarding the second constraint, the qubit q3 in Fig. 2 cannot serve as a control qubit for this configuration, since the target bit q4 is not present in the system.  

> B. Hamiltonian and Problem Instances

To evaluate the performance of the proposed auto-mated design framework, we employ two distinct bench-marks: the Max-Cut problem and the ground-state sim-ulation of the hydrogen molecule ( H2). The Max-Cut problem [18] seeks to partition the vertex set V of an undirected graph G = ( V, E ) into two disjoint subsets S and ¯S such that the sum of the weights of the edges between them is maximized. In this study, we utilize a 4-vertex graph with uniform edge weights, as illustrated in Fig. 4. The Hamiltonian for this problem is mapped onto a 4-qubit system and consists entirely of diagonal Pauli-Z operators, providing a baseline for evaluating the agent’s ability to minimize cost functions in a discrete combinatorial landscape. For quantum chemical calculations, we target the ground-state energy of the hydrogen molecule (H2). While the H2 system is the simplest molecular model, it serves as a critical PoC for our framework. Specifically, its well-understood energy landscape allows for an unam-biguous evaluation of the RL agent’s ability to achieve the Full Configuration Interaction (Full-CI) result with min-imal circuit depth. By utilizing this fundamental model, we can strictly verify whether the DDQN can eliminate redundant gates that are often present in manually de-signed or heuristic ansatz. To transform the fermionic Hamiltonian into a qubit-compatible format, we adopt the Bravyi-Kitaev (BK) transformation [19]. In contrast to the Jordan-Wigner transformation [20], the BK method maps fermion op-erators to Pauli strings with a logarithmic scaling of lo-cality, O(log N ), for the N -qubit system. This logarith-mic mapping effectively reduces the circuit overhead re-quired to achieve chemical accuracy. Furthermore, while the Max-Cut Hamiltonian is composed exclusively of di-agonal Pauli-Z terms, the H2 Hamiltonian incorporates        

> FIG. 5. (a) Example of 4-qubit quantum circuit, (b) List rep-resentation of the quantum circuit on (a). In the table (b), the label 0 indicates the absence of the gate, (1 ,2,3,4) rep-resents ( Rx, R y, R z, I ), and (5 ,6) represents (control, target) part of the CNOT gate.

off-diagonal terms involving Pauli-X and Y operators. These off-diagonal elements induce a complex matrix structure of the Hamiltonian compared with the Max-Cut problem, and the RL agent consequently must ex-plore a broader manifold of the Hilbert space, requiring a more sophisticated and expressive ansatz circuit.  

> C. Neural Network Architecture

The DDQN agent utilizes a deep neural network to ap-proximate the action-value function Q(St, A t). The net-work architecture consists of an input layer, three fully connected (dense) hidden layers, and an output layer. The input to the network is a vectorized representation of the current quantum circuit St. Specifically, the 4 × 10 circuit grid is mapped into a one-dimensional list, where each gate configuration is encoded as integers as illus-trated in Fig. 5: 

• 0: Empty slot 

• 1–3 : Single-qubit rotation gates ( Rx, R y , R z )

• 4: Identity gate ( I)

• 5, 6 : CNOT gate (control and target qubits, re-spectively) Each of the three hidden layers contains 32 nodes equipped with the Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) acti-vation function. The output layer consists of five nodes, each corresponding to the estimated Q-value for the avail-able actions for ( Rx, R y , R z , I, CNOT). To ensure ro-bust weight updates, we employ the Huber loss function, which is less sensitive to outliers in Q-value estimation than the mean squared error. The network parameters are optimized using the Adam optimizer. In our implementation, the two networks Qθ and Qθ′

are synchronized by copying the weights of the online network to the target network every 30 episodes. This periodic update stabilizes the learning process by pro-viding a consistent target for the Q-value estimation. 6  

> D. Detailed Settings
> 1. Reward Function

The reward Rt is designed to prioritize both the min-imization of the energy expectation value and the com-pactness of the circuit structure. We first employ the following reward: 

Rt = ( Et−1 − Et) + c(gmax − g)Θ( Ethreshold − Et), (11) where Et−1 and Et are the energy expectation values before and after the action At, respectively. The term g

denotes the current gate count, and gmax is the predefined upper limit ( gmax = 30 in the current case). We utilize the gate count rather than circuit depth in the reward function to provide a finer evaluation of circuit size. The second term incorporates the Heavi-side step function Θ( x), which activates an additional smaller-circuit reward c(gmax − g) only when the circuit successfully provides the expected value of the Hamilto-nian Et that is lower than the given threshold Ethreshold .We used the weight hyperparameter c to be 0 .1.  

> 2. Evolving Threshold

We implement an evolving thresholding mechanism for Ethreshold . The threshold is initialized at 0 .0 since the ground state energies in both benchmark models are known to be negative. To drive the agent toward the lower energy state, Ethreshold is updated every 10 suc-cessful episodes to Ebest − ϵ, where Ebest is the minimum energy achieved from the start of learning up to the cur-rent learning point, and we used ϵ = 0 .01. Furthermore, a lower bound is imposed on the thresh-old to ensure the target remains within a physically plau-sible range, where this bound is set to 0 .9Emin . For the current numerical experiments, we assume Emin is given to validate the framework. Strategies for scenarios where 

Emin is unavailable will be addressed in the Discussion section. Here, the reference ground-state energy Emin is set to −3.0 for the Max-Cut problem and the Full-CI value ( EFCI ≈ − 1.137 Ha) for the hydrogen molecule.  

> 3. Numerical Setup and Hyperparameters

As mentioned earlier, the design environment is con-figured for a 4-qubit system with a maximum depth of 10 and a maximum gate count of 30. The learning process is evaluated based on the energy expectation value, gate count, circuit depth, and cumulative reward. For the DDQN hyperparameters, the learning rate α is set to 0 .001, and the discount factor γ is set to 0 .99. Re-garding experience replay, the buffer capacity is 50 , 000 episodes. At the end of each episode, the network is       

> FIG. 6. Episode-dependence of (a) the expectation value of the Hamiltonian ⟨H⟩, (b) cumulative reward R, (c) gate count
> g, and (d) circuit depth Daveraged over 100 trials for the Max-Cut problem. The red dashed line in (a) represents the theoretical minimum energy Emin .

updated through 64 iterations using mini-batches of 128 samples randomly drawn from the replay buffer. The exploration-exploitation trade-off is governed by the ε-greedy policy. We initialized the exploration prob-ability at ε = 1 .0 with a decay rate of Γ = 0 .985 and a lower bound of 0 .1. This persistent 10% exploration probability ensures that the agent continues to discover efficient circuit designs and avoids premature conver-gence to local minima. The proposed framework was implemented using Keras for the neural network architecture, OpenAI Gym for the reinforcement learning environment, and Qiskit for quan-tum circuit simulation and expectation value calculation.   

> V. RESULTS A. Max-Cut Problem

The performance of the DDQN agent on the Max-Cut problem over 100 independent trials is summarized in Fig. 6. As learning progresses, the energy expecta-tion value ⟨H⟩ converges toward the theoretical minimum value, and the cumulative reward exhibits a correspond-ing increase, indicating successful policy optimization. Specifically, regarding the circuit complexity, both the average gate count g and circuit depth D exhibit a distinct monotonic decrease from around episode 25 to around episode 150. This interval represents a stable op-timization phase where the agent effectively transitions from initial stochastic exploration to a structured design strategy. During this period, the framework consistently identifies and eliminates redundant gates while maintain-ing the required energy precision. 7

> FIG. 7. The smallest quantum circuit designed for the Max-Cut problem found in the RL method.

However, beyond approximately episode 150, we ob-served a slight reversal in this trend, with both gate count and depth beginning to increase. This behavior, accom-panied by a decline in cumulative reward, suggests that the agent’s policy may become overly sensitive to the in-creasingly stringent energy requirements of the evolving threshold. As Ethreshold approaches the global minimum, the agent likely prioritizes marginal energy improvements by introducing compensatory gates, even at the expense of the circuit compactness reward. This behavior indicates a trade-off between absolute precision and circuit compactness. The instability ob-served after episode 150 implies that the current reward structure may require further improvement—such as in-creasing the penalty for circuit complexity—to maintain the monotonic decrease in gate count throughout the en-tire training duration. In contrast to the H2 molecular problem, a repetition number of p = 1 in the hardware-efficient SU(2) ansatz is sufficient for ground state convergence in the Max-Cut problem. Excluding the initial Hadamard gates, this baseline configuration consists of 19 gates and a circuit depth of 7. By episode 200, the agent of the RL achieved an average reduction of approximately 37% in gate count (g ≈ 12) and 43% in circuit depth ( D ≈ 4) relative to this hardware-efficient SU(2) baseline with p = 1. Notably, the proposed framework successfully discovered the opti-mal circuit ( g = 4 , D = 1) required to reach Emin = −3.0, as illustrated in Fig. 7. This optimal configuration rep-resents a significant reduction of 79% in gate count and 86% in circuit depth compared to the baseline.  

> B. Hydrogen Molecular Hamiltonian

The performance of the DDQN agent on the H2 Hamil-tonian over 100 trials of 200 episodes is presented in Fig. 8. Similar to the Max-Cut problem, following an initial intensive exploration phase, we observed a con-sistent downward trend in the energy expectation value 

⟨H⟩, average gate count g, and circuit depth D as the agent’s policy began to stabilize. By episode 200, the agent significantly reduced the circuit complexity rela-         

> FIG. 8. Episode-dependence of (a) the expectation value of the Hamiltonian ⟨H⟩, (b) cumulative reward R, (c) gate count
> g, and (d) circuit depth Daveraged over 100 trials for the hydrogen molecular Hamiltonian. The orange and red lines in (a) represent EHF and EFCI , respectively.

tive to the hardware-efficient SU(2) baseline with p = 2 (Fig. 3), resulting in an average gate count of g ≈ 10 and a depth of D ≈ 3, which correspond to reductions of 66% and 72%, respectively. Despite these structural optimizations, the majority of the designed circuits remained near the Hartree-Fock en-ergy level EHF , with only 156 episodes (about 0.78%) reaching the Full-CI value ( EFCI ) over 20,000 episodes (100 trials with 200 episodes each). Unlike the Max-Cut problem, reaching Emin in quantum chemical calculations presents a significantly more complex task; it requires identifying sophisticated gate structures that can both capture essential quantum correlations and maintain high numerical precision. Our results suggest that the rela-tively short training duration of 200 episodes was insuf-ficient for the agent to consistently navigate the complex energy landscape due to the quantum correlation. To address this, we extended the training duration to 5,000 episodes over 10 independent runs, adjusting the exploration parameters to Γ = 0 .9993 and a lower bound of ε = 0 .05. As shown in Fig. 9, this extended training further streamlined the circuit complexity, achieving an average reduction of 80% in both gate count ( g ≈ 6) and depth ( D ≈ 2). Despite the extended training, only 191 circuits (approximately 0.38%) reached the Full-CI results within the total 50,000 episodes (10 runs with 5,000 episodes each). According to Eq. (11), if the Hamiltonian expecta-tion value improves from the Hartree-Fock value ( EHF ≈−1.116) to the Full-CI value ( EFCI ≈ − 1.137), the re-sulting reward increment is approximately 0 .021. In con-trast, the reduction of a single quantum gate ( g) yields a reward increase of c = 0 .1 in the current case, which is nearly five times larger than the reward obtained by the recovery of quantum electronic correlation. Furthermore, 8         

> FIG. 9. Episode-dependence of (a) the expectation value of the Hamiltonian ⟨H⟩, (b) cumulative reward R, (c) gate count
> g, and (d) circuit depth Daveraged over 10 trials for the hy-drogen molecular Hamiltonian upto 5,000 episodes. In (a), the orange and red dashed lines represent EHF and EFCI , respec-tively. In (c) and (d), the green lines denote the prescribed upper bounds.

the current threshold for successful circuit design has a lower bound of 0 .9EFCI ≈ − 1.0467, which is higher than 

EHF . This loose constraint allowed the agent to accept mean-field approximations as successes. Consequently, the agent first prioritizes falling below the loose thresh-old higher than EHF before focusing on gate reduction, and then prioritized “minimizing the gate count” over “minimizing the energy expectation value” to maximize cumulative rewards.  

> VI. DISCUSSION

The results in the previous section indicate that sim-ply increasing the number of training episodes is insuffi-cient for the agent to converge to the ground state of the hydrogen molecular Hamiltonian. This indicates that a more sophisticated reward and threshold structure is vi-tal for attaining the high precision of chemical accuracy. In the following, we refine the reward structure and the energy threshold mechanism to ensure better precision and optimized circuit complexity.  

> A. Refined Reward Design

There are two inherent drawbacks in the reward design used in the previous section. First, it lacks precise nor-malization across different scales. Second, although Emin 

is typically unknown in practical applications, it was im-plicitly incorporated into the reward function as a lower bound of the energy threshold. We introduce a reward function Rt that eliminates the need for prior knowledge of Emin while ensuring efficient normalization, which is also constructed to balance the competing objectives of energetic optimization and cir-cuit minimality. At each step t, this reward can be given by 

Rt = Et−1 − Et

Et−1 − Ebound 

+ gmax − ggmax 

Θ( Ethreshold −Et), (12) where Ebound serves as a theoretical lower bound, de-rived as the negative sum of the absolute values of the Pauli coefficients {λα} constituting the Hamiltonian 

H = P λαPα, given by Ebound = − P 

> α

|λα| [2]. Since the expectation value of any Pauli string Pα satisfies 

|⟨ Pα⟩| ≤ 1, this value represents the absolute minimum energy attainable in the operator space. This approach provides a robust normalization constant for the reward signal regardless of whether the true ground state en-ergy is known. For the hydrogen molecular Hamilto-nian in this study, the lower bound is calculated as 

Ebound ≈ − 1.985 .. .The first term in Eq. (12) provides a reward for energy reduction relative to the defined lower bound Ebound .The second term, representing the reward for “circuit ef-ficiency,” is activated only if the energy is below the spec-ified threshold Ethreshold . An episode terminates either when the expectation value Et falls below the threshold 

Ethreshold , or when the circuit exceeds the prescribed lim-its for gate count or depth. At the point of successful ter-mination, the agent receives the bonus ( gmax − g)/g max ,which rewards the discovery of compact circuit architec-tures.  

> B. Adaptive Energy Thresholding

To drive the agent toward lower energy states, the threshold Ethreshold is dynamically updated based on the best performance achieved in earlier episodes. Based on the adaptive threshold strategy for the VQE [2], we define the threshold to reflect the minimum energy discovered across all preceding episodes as well as to ensure a pro-gressive minimization of the energy expectation value. The initial value of the threshold Ethreshold ,0 for the hy-drogen molecular Hamiltonian is defined by incorporat-ing an energetic margin ξ0 relative to the Hartree-Fock energy, expressed as EHF + ξ0. To ensure a continuous optimization drive, the threshold is updated through two concurrent adaptive mechanisms. First, the threshold Ethreshold is recalibrated every 200 episodes to prevent the agent from becoming trapped in local minima and to encourage broader exploration. The update rule is defined as follows: 

Ethreshold ←

(

Ethreshold + ξ if Ethreshold < E best 

Ebest + ξ if Ethreshold ≥ Ebest ,

(13) where Ebest represents the minimum energy recorded across all training episodes up to the current step, and 

ξ > 0 is a small margin introduced to intentionally relax the constraint. By periodically resetting the threshold to a value slightly higher than the historical minimum Ebest ,9we provide the agent with the “room” to explore diverse gate sequences that might temporarily yield higher en-ergy but eventually lead to more efficient circuit archi-tectures. In parallel, a performance-driven update is triggered once the agent demonstrates stability, defined as achiev-ing 20 consecutive successful designs at the current threshold. This mechanism ensures that as the agent masters a certain accuracy level, the threshold is further tightened to drive convergence toward the true ground state: 

Ethreshold ←

(

Ebest if Ethreshold < E best 

Ethreshold − ϵ if Ethreshold ≥ Ebest ,

(14) Consistent with our reward design, the global lower bound for these updates is maintained at Ebound , the theoretical operator-space limit. In this study, we em-ploy ξ0 = ξ = 0 .005, and ϵ = 0 .0005.  

> C. Performance under Refined Reward and Adoptive Threshold

To evaluate the efficacy of the refined reward func-tional and the adaptive thresholding strategy, we con-ducted 10 independent trials of 5,000 episodes each for the H2 molecular Hamiltonian. Fig. 10 illustrates the evolutionary trajectory of the expectation value of the Hamiltonian, cumulative reward, number of the gates, and the circuit depth. The stricter success criteria forced the agent to utilize more optimization steps, causing the gate count and circuit depth to remain near their up-per bounds. Meanwhile, the average expectation value of the Hamiltonian exhibited a downward trend, consis-tently surpassing the Hartree-Fock value ( EHF ) around the 3,200-th episode. Notably, the policy successfully re-solved the Full-CI energy ( EFCI ) in 4,458 instances across 50,000 total episodes (10 trials with 5,000 episodes each). This represents a success rate of approximately 8.91%, a significant order-of-magnitude improvement over the 0.38% observed in the previous setup. For the circuits achieving chemical accuracy, the aver-age gate count and depth were 20.78 and 6.94, respec-tively. Compared to the conventional hardware-efficient SU(2) ansatz with p = 2 (Fig. 3), our method achieved reduction rates of 31% in gate count and 37% in cir-cuit depth. The increasing frequency of the circuit that reaches EFCI solutions beyond 3,000 episodes suggests that extended training further stabilizes the policy to-ward high-precision regimes in this setup. While the proposed framework successfully identi-fies compact circuit architectures, the computational overhead—approximately three weeks to one month for 10 independent runs, each spanning 5,000 episodes, in our numerical environment—suggests that performing a full reinforcement learning cycle for each new problem entails significant computational overhead, limiting its          

> FIG. 10. Episode-dependence of (a) the expectation value of the Hamiltonian ⟨H⟩(Ha), (b) cumulative reward R, (c) gate count g, and (d) circuit depth Daveraged over 10 trials for the hydrogen molecular Hamiltonian up to 5,000 episodes. We here employ the RL method with the normalized regard and the adaptive energy threshold. In (a), the orange and red dashed lines represent EHF and EFCI , respectively. In (c) and (d), the green lines denote the prescribed upper bounds.

feasibility for practical deployments. Rather than treat-ing this as a real-time problem solver, its strategic value is two-fold. First, it serves as a high-quality generator of training datasets for supervised learning models, pro-viding an informative corpus of “optimal” circuit config-urations. Second, it facilitates the extraction of univer-sal structural motifs from the obtained quantum circuits, enabling the identification of fundamental gate sequences essential for capturing quantum correlation. We expect these insights to be a crucial step toward establishing automated design guidelines for quantum circuit ansatz that transcend individual problem instances. For the second point, while the obtained circuits reach-ing EFCI exhibit various gate patterns (Fig. 11(a)-(c)), further structural analysis allows for the isolation of their most critical components. By identifying and extracting these core functional motifs while eliminating redundant operations, we arrive at the streamlined circuit shown in Fig. 11(d) that can also provides the EFCI result for the VITE. This configuration represents a significant reduc-tion of 77% in gate count ( g = 7) and 64% in circuit depth ( D = 4) compared to the baseline. This reduction from (a)–(c) to (d) demonstrates that while there is still scope for further refinement in our RL framework—such as incorporating the adaptive threshold strategy to not only the expectation value of the Hamiltonian but also gate count—the generated circuits effectively reveal the “essential skeleton” required for high accuracy.  

> VII. CONCLUSION

In this study, we developed an automated quantum cir-cuit design framework for the variational imaginary time evolution (VITE) method using double Deep-Q Networks (DDQN). Through evaluations of the Max-Cut problem and the hydrogen molecular Hamiltonian, we demon-10 

FIG. 11. (a)-(c) Examples of circuits reaching EFCI obtained in the present RL method. By comparing the architectures of circuits (a)–(c) and isolating their overlapping components, the “essential skeleton” was identified in circuit (d); this re-fined structure successfully reached EFCI .

strated that the reinforcement learning (RL) agent can generate the quantum circuits that can successfully opti-mize both energy and circuit complexity. For applications requiring computational accuracy, such as quantum chemistry calculations, the results tend to be approximate solutions if we choose a loose energy threshold. By refining the reward function and imple-menting an adaptive thresholding mechanism, we signif-icantly improved the agent’s ability to reach chemical accuracy. Additionally, we demonstrated that extract-ing common functional motifs from these RL-optimized circuits facilitates the identification of a “essential skele-ton.” This finding suggests that the proposed method serves as both a high-quality circuit generator of training data and a powerful heuristic for establishing universal design guidelines for compact, problem-specific quantum ansatz. Future work will focus on scaling this framework to larger systems and investigating its effectiveness across diverse quantum chemistry, combinatorial optimization and quantum machine learning problems. A key refine-ment will involve extending the adaptive threshold strat-egy to optimize not only the Hamiltonian expectation value but also the gate count. Furthermore, the estab-lishment of design guidelines tailored to specific problem properties will be facilitated by building a comprehensive corpus of optimal quantum circuits, derived from the au-tomated design of diverse systems. 

ACKNOWLDGEMENT 

We thank Kota Mizuno for fruitful discussions. This study was supported by JST PRESTO JPMJPR211A and the New Energy and Industrial Technology Develop-ment Organization (NEDO, JPNP25014). 

[1] J. Preskill, Quantum computing in the nisq era and be-yond, Quantum 2, 79 (2018). [2] M. Ostaszewski, L. M. Trenkwalder, W. Masarczyk, E. Scerri, and V. Dunjko, Reinforcement learning for op-timization of variational quantum circuit architectures, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34 ,18182 (2021). [3] T. F¨ osel, M. Y. Niu, F. Marquardt, and L. Li, Quan-tum circuit optimization with deep reinforcement learn-ing, arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.07585 (2021). [4] M. K¨ olle, T. Schubert, P. Altmann, M. Zorn, J. Stein, and C. Linnhoff-Popien, A reinforcement learning envi-ronment for directed quantum circuit synthesis, arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.07054 (2024). [5] T. Kimura, K. Shiba, C.-C. Chen, M. Sogabe, K. Sakamoto, and T. Sogabe, Quantum circuit architec-tures via quantum observable markov decision process planning, Journal of Physics Communications 6, 075006 (2022). [6] M. Cerezo, A. Arrasmith, R. Babbush, S. C. Benjamin, S. Endo, K. Fujii, J. R. McClean, K. Mitarai, X. Yuan, L. Cincio, et al. , Variational quantum algorithms, Nature Reviews Physics 3, 625 (2021). [7] A. Kandala, A. Mezzacapo, K. Temme, M. Takita, M. Brink, J. M. Chow, and J. M. Gambetta, Hardware-efficient variational quantum eigensolver for small molecules and quantum magnets, nature 549 , 242 (2017). [8] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov, Proximal policy optimization algorithms, arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 (2017). [9] E. Farhi, J. Goldstone, and S. Gutmann, A quan-tum approximate optimization algorithm, arXiv preprint arXiv:1411.4028 (2014). [10] M. Motta, C. Sun, A. T. Tan, M. J. O’Rourke, E. Ye, A. J. Minnich, F. G. Brandao, and G. K.-L. Chan, De-termining eigenstates and thermal states on a quantum computer using quantum imaginary time evolution, Na-ture Physics 16 , 205 (2020). [11] X. Yuan, S. Endo, Q. Zhao, Y. Li, and S. C. Benjamin, Theory of variational quantum simulation, Quantum 3,191 (2019). [12] G.-C. Wick, Properties of bethe-salpeter wave functions, Physical Review 96 , 1124 (1954). [13] A. D. McLachlan, A variational solution of the time-dependent schrodinger equation, Molecular Physics 8, 39 (1964). [14] J. Broeckhove, L. Lathouwers, E. Kesteloot, and P. Van Leuven, On the equivalence of time-dependent variational principles, Chemical physics letters 149 , 547 (1988). [15] L. P. Kaelbling, M. L. Littman, and A. W. Moore, Rein-forcement learning: A survey, Journal of artificial intelli-gence research 4, 237 (1996). [16] M. Tokic, Adaptive ε-greedy exploration in reinforcement learning based on value differences, in Annual conference on artificial intelligence (Springer, 2010) pp. 203–210. [17] H. Van Hasselt, A. Guez, and D. Silver, Deep reinforce-ment learning with double q-learning, in Proceedings of 11 

the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , Vol. 30 (2016). [18] M. X. Goemans and D. P. Williamson, Improved approx-imation algorithms for maximum cut and satisfiability problems using semidefinite programming, Journal of the ACM (JACM) 42 , 1115 (1995). [19] J. T. Seeley, M. J. Richard, and P. J. Love, The bravyi-kitaev transformation for quantum computation of elec-tronic structure, The Journal of chemical physics 137 

(2012). [20] E. Fradkin, Jordan-wigner transformation for quantum-spin systems in two dimensions and fractional statistics, Physical review letters 63 , 322 (1989).